Link awakens from a deep slumber and a mysterious voice guides Link to discover what has become of the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom. Link leaves the Shrine of Resurrection and looks out at the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom on top of the Great Plateau. Link then meets an Old Man by a campfire. an Old Man promises Link an Old Man's Paraglider, which is the only way to get down from the Great Plateau. However, an Old Man first wants Spirit Orbs from nearby Shrines, in particular the Oman Au Shrine, Ja Baij Shrine, Owa Daim Shrine, and the Keh Namut Shrine. After Link gets Spirit Orbs from nearby Shrines, in particular the Oman Au Shrine, Ja Baij Shrine, Owa Daim Shrine, and the Keh Namut Shrine, an Old Man appears, then mysteriously disappears, telling Link to meet an Old Man in the Temple of Time. an Old Man reveals an Old Man as the spirit of the deceased King of the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom, King Rhoam. Link learns from the deceased King of Hyrule, King Rhoam that 100 years prior, a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon rose up and laid waste to the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom and the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom's people. Unable to be defeated, a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon was sealed within Hyrule Castle, while the ruins of the land were ravaged by nature over time. Although trapped, a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon has grown in power, and Link must defeat a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon before a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon breaks free once more and destroys the world. a mysterious voice turns out to be Zelda, who is the daughter of the deceased King of Hyrule, King Rhoam. 

After escaping the confines of the Great Plateau, Link is directed to meet the wise Sheikah elder Impa, and learn about the Guardians and Divine Beasts: 10,000 years prior the Guardians and Divine Beasts were created and successfully used by another Hero and another Princess to defeat a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon. But throughout the ages, knowledge about the Guardians and Divine Beasts was lost until excavations in the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom brought the Guardians and Divine Beasts to light once more, coinciding with the expected return of a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon a hundred years ago. Guardians were reactivated and four Champions were chosen to control Divine Beasts: the Zora princess Mipha, the Goron warrior Daruk, the Gerudo chief Urbosa, and the Rito archer Revali. All the while, Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam was unsuccessfully trying to gain access to Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam's own prophesied powers, accompanied on Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam's quests by Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam's knight, the Hylian Champion Link. When a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon ultimately attacked, a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon devastated the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom by taking control of the ancient machines and turning the ancient machines against the Hyruleans. As a last resort, Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam was able to place Link in the Shrine of Resurrection and use Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam's awoken sealing powers to trap Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam with a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon in Hyrule Castle.

As Link sets off on Link's quest to defeat a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon, Link is asked to investigate the fate of Divine Beasts and Divine Beasts's former Champions. Link's ultimate goal remains to reach a great evil known as the Calamity Ganon and free Zelda, who is the daughter of King Rhoam before the world is laid to waste. But with the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom before Link to explore, it is up to Link Link to decide how Link wishes to fulfill Link's foretold role as the Hylian Champion, and to save the ruined country of Hyrule Kingdom.