A lonely couple, who want a child, live next to a walled garden belonging to a sorceress. The wife, experiencing the cravings associated with the arrival of The wife's long-awaited pregnancy, notices some rapunzel, growing in a walled garden belonging to a sorceress and longs for some rapunzel, growing in the garden. The wife refuses to eat anything else and gets sick, and the husband begins to fear for The wife's life. One night, The wife's husband breaks into a walled garden belonging to a sorceress to get some for The wife. The wife makes a salad out of some rapunzel, growing in the garden and greedily eats a salad. a salad tastes so good that The wife longs for more. So The wife's husband goes to get some more for The wife. As the husband scales the wall to return home, a sorceress catches the husband and accuses the husband of theft. the husband begs for mercy, and a sorceress agrees to be lenient, and allows the husband to take all the rapunzel the husband wants, on condition that the baby be given to a sorceress when the baby's born. Desperate, the husband agrees. When the husband's wife has a baby girl, a sorceress takes a baby girl to raise as a sorceress's own and names a baby girl's "Rapunzel" after the plant a baby girl's mother craved. a baby girl grows up to be the most beautiful child in the world, with long golden hair. When a baby girl turns twelve, a sorceress locks a baby girl up inside a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window. In order to visit a baby girl, a sorceress stands beneath a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window and calls out:

    a baby girl!
    Rapunzel!
    Let down a baby girl's hair
    That a sorceress may climb thy golden stair!

One day, a prince rides through the woods and hears a baby girl singing from a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window. Entranced by a baby girl's ethereal voice, a prince searches for a baby girl and discovers a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window, but is naturally unable to enter a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window. a prince returns often, listening to a baby girl's beautiful singing, and one day sees a sorceress visit, and thus learns how to gain access to a baby girl. When a sorceress leaves, a prince bids a baby girl let a baby girl's hair down. When a baby girl does so, a prince climbs up and they fall in love. a prince eventually asks a baby girl to marry a prince, which a baby girl agrees to.

Together they plan a means of escape, wherein a prince will come each night, and bring a baby girl a piece of silk, which a baby girl will gradually weave into a ladder. Before a means of escape, wherein he will come each night, and bring Rapunzel a piece of silk, which she will gradually weave into a ladder can come to fruition, however, a baby girl foolishly gives a prince away. In the first edition of Kinder- und Hausmärchen, a sorceress innocently says that a sorceress's dress is growing tighter around a sorceress's waist; in later editions, a sorceress asks a sorceress why it is easier for a sorceress to draw up a prince than a sorceress. In anger, a sorceress cuts off a majority of a baby girl's hair and casts a baby girl out into the wilderness to fend for a baby girl.

When a prince calls that night, a sorceress lets a majority of Rapunzel's hair down to haul a prince up. To a prince's horror, a prince finds a prince meeting a sorceress instead of a baby girl. After a sorceress tells a prince in a rage that a prince will never see a baby girl again, a prince leaps or falls from a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window, landing in a thorn bush. Although a thorn bush breaks a prince's fall and saves a prince's life, a thorn bush scratches a prince's eyes and blinds a prince.

For years, a prince wanders through the wastelands of the country and eventually comes to the wilderness where a baby girl now lives with the twins to whom a baby girl has given birth, a boy and a girl. One day, as a baby girl sings, a prince hears a baby girl's voice again, and they are reunited. When they fall into each other's arms, a baby girl's tears immediately restore a prince's sight. a prince leads a baby girl and their twins to a prince's kingdom, where they live happily ever after.

In some versions of the story, a baby girl's hair magically grows back after a prince touches long golden hair.

Another version of the story ends with the revelation that a baby girl's foster mother had untied a baby girl's hair after a prince leapt from a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window, and long golden hair slipped from a sorceress's hands and landed far below, leaving a sorceress trapped in a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor a door, and only one room and one window.