This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am an assassin, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #6". Nornal is a location. Nornal is an ancient ruin. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island inhabited by Nords. Gnoll Mountain is a location. Gnoll Mountain is a mountain.  is a location. a small campsite is a location. Havilstein Hoar-Blood is present in a small campsite. Havilstein Hoar-Blood is a male Nord barbarian, lives alone and exposed. "Dead Drop Orders #6" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #6" is a note. 
Dead Drop Orders #6
by Lucien Lachance

Alval Uvani is dead, just like all the others. You continue to impress me, Silencer, and I am only too eager to indulge your homicidal instincts.
Your next target is a savage Nord barbarian, living alone and exposed at a small campsite on the summit of Gnoll Mountain. This barbarian, Havilstein Hoar-Blood by name, savagely butchered the chieftain of a mead hall on the island of Solstheim. The chieftain's sister has forgone the Nord custom of extracting the monetary retribution of wergild, and instead wants Hoar-Blood to pay with his life. You, dear Silencer, will help put her family at peace.
You are to go to Gnoll Mountain, locate Havilstein Hoar-Blood, and send his soul to the great beyond.
When Hoar-Blood has been executed, journey to the ancient ruin of Nornal. In the flooded section of that ruin you will find a chest, submerged in the water. As you may have guessed, the chest contains your reward for killing Havilstein Hoar-Blood, 500 gold, and your next contract.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Shum gro-Yarug. I am the Count's butler. Skingrad is a location. Shum gro-Yarug is present in Skingrad. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. Rosethorn Hall is a location. Vandorallen Trebatius is present in Rosethorn Hall. Vandorallen Trebatius is a man. 
I'm Shum gro-Yarug, the Count's butler.
So you want to buy a house? I can speak for the Count. Rosethorn Hall is a stately manor currently occupied by Vandorallen Trebatius. You won't find a better property for sale in Skingrad. It's just inside the main gate, near the bridge to the chapel.
The house costs 25,000 septims. Give me the septims, and I will order the deed to the house drawn up.
Don't worry about Vandorallen Trebatius. I'll have him evicted. I'm sure he'll find another home easily.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Countess Valga. I am a female noble ruling over Chorrol. Chorrol is a location. Countess Valga is present in Chorrol. Northern Goods and Trade is a location. Northern Goods and Trade is Seed-Neeus's store. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Seed-Neeus is present in Northern Goods and Trade. Seed-Neeus is a female merchant. 
It is a pleasure to meet you. I am Countess Valga of Chorrol.
Are you looking for a house to buy? There is a positively gorgeous home for sale right on the main plaza. You'll be hard pressed to find a nicer home for sale in Chorrol.
The house is called Arborwatch, and it costs 20,000 gold to buy the house from me. It would be a pleasure to have you become a citizen of Chorrol.
The last tenant of Arborwatch has cleaned the place of furniture. I'd recommend stopping by Northern Goods and Trade. The owner, Seed-Neeus, should have everything you need.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Falcar. I am a rude mage from the mages' guild. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is an esteemed school for mages. Ring of Burden is an object. Ring of Burden is a magical ring. 
What is it, Associate? Don't tell me you're here for a recommendation from me.
There was a particular Ring of Burden I was testing some time ago. Another stupid Associate somehow got his hands on it, and managed to misplace it. If I didn't know better, I'd say he purposely tossed it down the well behind the guild hall. Why he would do such a thing is beyond me.
You will retrieve this ring for me. Should you manage to do so, I shall consider sending a recommendation to the Arcane University.
The well is locked, so you'll need the key. Deetsan should have a copy of it. Now get moving.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ursanne. I am a worried wife. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a nice town. Lonely Suitor Lodge is a location. Lonely Suitor Lodge is an inn. Kurdan gro-Dragol is present in Lonely Suitor Lodge. Kurdan gro-Dragol is an impatient male usurer. gold is an object. 
I'm Ursanne. I'm sorry to impose upon you like this, but I'm in need of assistance, and I don't know what to do. My husband, Aleron, is missing.
It all started when Aleron became foolish, and started gambling. He'd visit the arena every week and spend our hard earned money on bets. I told him to stop, but he didn't listen. He was certain he could win us a fortune and move us somewhere nicer, like the Imperial City. It didn't take long for Aleron to begin losing. He resorted to borrowing money from a usurer to cover his losses and place new bets. As you can imagine, it didn't pay off. He ended up owing around 500 gold. We could never have that kind of money to pay back the usurer.
Yesterday, the usurer, Kurdan gro-Dragol, sent for my husband to meet him at the Lonely Suitor Lodge. He hasn't returned since. I fear for his life. Kurdan isn't known for his patience. Please, I'm not wealthy, but I'd give anything to see Aleron again. Please, find Aleron.
Farewell, and be careful, Kurdan is not to be trusted.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Countess Arriana Valga. I am the noblewoman who leads Chorrol. Castle Chorrol is a location. Countess Arriana Valga is present in Castle Chorrol. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Castle Chorrol is a location. Castle Chorrol is a castle in Chorrol. a painting is an object. a painting is a stolen painting depicting Count Valga. 
I am Countess Arriana Valga of Chorrol. I wish I had time to chat, but I'm afraid I am in the middle of an investigation.
You seem the trusting type. Perhaps you can assist me? It seems someone has taken away an heirloom that is quite dear to me. I want you to help me recover a stolen painting. The painting was of my lost love, the Count Valga, and it has been stolen from my bedchamber. If you find the painting, and bring the culprit to justice, you shall be justly rewarded.
I suggest you begin to gather clues. And I warn you: do not accuse the wrong person, or I shall be quite cross with you. Here are some keys. They should allow you access to many of the restricted areas in Castle Chorrol.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Regulus Terentius. I am Count of Bravil. Bravil is a location. Regulus Terentius is present in Bravil. The Fair Deal is a location. The Fair Deal is Nilawen's store. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Nilawen is present in The Fair Deal. Nilawen is a female trader. 
Regulus Terentius, Count of Bravil. So you're looking for a house to buy here in Bravil? Really?
It just so happens there is a modest shack overlooking the canal. It's not much to look at, but the smell will soon make you forget how ugly it is. Pay me 4,000 gold, and it's all yours.
I'll have my steward register the deed of ownership. It's squalid little shack, I'm sorry to say. Oh, and the place is fairly bare. If I were you, I'd head on over to Nilawen at The Fair Deal and get some furnishings. Or you could always eat off the floor... doesn't matter to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Clavicus Vile. I am the prince of trickery and bargains, one of Daedric Princes. Pell's Gate is a location. Pell's Gate is a village. Umbra the Sword is an object. Umbra the Sword is a sword. 
A mortal! Wonderful. Always a pleasure. I'm Clavicus Vile, the Prince of Trickery and Bargains.
Perhaps you'll do a service for me, mortal. And I'll reward you. A fair bargain, don't you think? You will retrieve for me a sword, a very special sword. It contains the soul of Umbra the Hero, a hero I have had dealings with in the past.
Bring the sword to me, and I'll reward you with my Masque. You'll not find a better bargain, mortal. Begin your search in Pell's Gate.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vinicia Melissaeia. I am Office of Imperial Commerce. Imperial City is a location. Vinicia Melissaeia is present in Imperial City. Three Brothers Trade Goods is a location. Three Brothers Trade Goods is a store in the Market District. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. Sergius Verus is present in Three Brothers Trade Goods. Sergius Verus is a male trader. 
Vinicia Melissaeia, Office of Imperial Commerce. You desire a house in the Imperial City?
Why? I mean... of course. All I have available right now is a hovel on the Waterfront. It's yours for mere 2,000 septims. You may give those septims to me.
You'll find the house in the Waterfront District. It's not much to look at. You may want to spruce it up a bit with some furnishings. I'd suggest talking to Sergius Verus at Three Brothers Trade Goods in the Market District.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lady Narina Carvain. I am Countess of Bruma. Bruma is a location. Lady Narina Carvain is present in Bruma. Novaroma is a location. Novaroma is Suurootan's shop in Bruma. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city. Suurootan is present in Novaroma. Suurootan is a male trader. 
Lady Narina Carvain, Countess of Bruma. Welcome.
I've been looking for just the right owner for a special home I have. It's a quaint little house conveniently located just off the main gate. I'll sell it to you for 10,000 gold.
I've had a look at the place myself, and it could use some furnishings inside. Quite barren in there I'm afraid. I'm fairly certain that Suurootan at Novaroma here in Bruma can acquire the things you'll need to make it look like home.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Tove. I am an eccentric man, nicknamed "The Unrestful". 
Hello, my name is Tove. "The Unrestful," they call me. So much to do, and so little time. There's only one of me to go around, you know!
I keep forgetting that most people don't remember when we'll meet in the future. Wait, this is yesterday's future. I'm the one that's confused. Anyway, you're going to help me find calipers and tongs. No point in denying it. You've already agreed tomorrow.
I'm using them to build my skyboat. Just between you and me, the hardest part has been getting the water to not fall out of the air. Now if I can just get the water to fly through the air. That's what the calipers and tongs are for. I need them to keep the water airborne.
Are you willing to sell me calipers and tongs? Five gold each, just like I told you next week.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ushnar gro-Shadborgob. I am a man who fears cats. 
That cat beggar Bhisha the Khajiit is following me! He's going to eat me, I just know it. Don't look! He's standing right over there.
You haven't seen that filthy cat beggar have you? He's still around. I've seen him skulking like the filthy cat he is.
Isn't he scary? I wish someone would just make him disappear. I would do just about anything for you if you make him go away. Permanently. For good. Never to be seen again.
You need a dog. I happen to have one of my old ones still lying around. I'll send it to you after you get rid of the filthy cat man.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the prince of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. Sheogorath's realm is a location. Sheogorath is present in Sheogorath's realm. New Sheoth is a location. New Sheoth is the capital city of Sheogorath's realm. Sheogorath's Palace is a location. Sheogorath's Palace is a palace in New Sheoth. Duke of Mania is present in Sheogorath's Palace. Duke of Mania is a male noble serving Sheogorath. Duchess of Dementia is present in Sheogorath's Palace. Duchess of Dementia is a female noble serving Sheogorath. 
I'm Sheogorath, Prince of Madness. And other things. I'm not talking about them. As you should know by now.
You've run a maze like a good little rat, but no cheese for you yet. Well, maybe a little. I've granted you a new spell - the ability to summon Haskill, my Chamberlain, to aid you in your travels. He knows a lot. More than he knows.
Now we're going to give you a taste of where you have found yourself. You're going to learn. Two halves, two rulers, two places within my palace. Meet and greet. Do what they will, so you know what they're about.
The Duke of Mania and the Duchess of Dementia. Seek them out, and let them show you what New Sheoth is. You might be surprised. Once you understand what My Realm is, you might understand why it's important to keep it intact. And maybe you'll make some friends along the way. That's always nice!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Graman gro-Marad. I am the Bloated Float's bouncer and helmsman. Bloated Float is a location. Graman gro-Marad is present in Bloated Float. Bloated Float is a location. Bloated Float is a ship turned into an inn. Ormil is present in Bloated Float. Ormil is the man who owns the Bloated Float. 
About time someone showed up. Thank you for freeing me. I'm Graman gro-Marad, the Bloated Float's bouncer and helmsman.
I've been locked in that storage room for hours. I don't know exactly what's going on, but not long ago, a gang of thieves calling themselves The Blackwater Brigands stormed the ship. They took myself and Ormil, the Bloated Float's owner, hostage and put the ship to sea. I have no idea what they're after. If you can get me safely to the top deck, I can steer the Float home. But I'm not budging until the coast is clear. I'm used to dealing with drunken louts, not a gang of well-armed thieves.
Good luck... you'll need it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Pyke. I am a polite former Knight of the Thorn from Cyrodiil. Pyke's home in Shivering Isles is a location. Pyke is present in Pyke's home in Shivering Isles. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a land. Shivering Isles is a location. Shivering Isles is a strange realm. Fetid Grove is a location. Fetid Grove is a grove. gold medallion is an object. gold medallion is a small, round gold medallion, with an inscription "To Pyke, from Farwil" on the back. 
It's good to meet you. The name's Pyke, and I welcome you to my humble home. Please, make yourself comfortable.
Since you're here, I was wondering... do you think you could assist me? I'm having a bit of a crisis.
I was a Knight of the Thorn from Cyrodiil. As soon as I heard the gates to the Shivering Isles opened, I knew a threat was lurking inside. I made my way here and began exploring this strange place. As I was passing Fetid Grove, I was waylaid. Some dastardly Grummites stole my most prized possession... my medallion that signified my membership in the Knights. It's a small, round, gold medallion. On the back is the inscription "To Pyke, from Farwil".
Could you bring back my medallion from the Grummites at Fetid Grove? I will mark Fetid Grove on your map. You could have Thorn Shield as a reward. Good luck to you, friend!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lathon. I am the squire of Sir Roderic. Underpall Cave is a location. Underpall Cave is not a cave - a buried keep hosting Sir Berich's tomb. Sir Roderic is present in Underpall Cave. Sir Roderic is a holy knight. Sir Berich is present in Underpall Cave. Sir Berich is a questing knight of old. Greaves of the Crusader is an object. Greaves of the Crusader is holy greaves. 
Sir knight! I have terrible news. Sir Roderic... I think he's dead.
Sir Roderic was a holy knight, like you, questing for the Relics at the Prophet's call. I, Lathon, was his squire. I believed he was chosen by the gods to reclaim the Relics. At first things were going well. He prayed at all the shrines, and received a vision. A disturbing vision. "The shade of Sir Berich spoke to me," was all he said. "We must put him to rest." He said that Sir Berich's tomb was in Underpall Cave -- which is no cave, but some kind of buried keep.
He had learned that Sir Berich had once been a questing knight, like us. He had found the Greaves and Sword of the Crusader, but then turned to evil. Sir Roderic hoped to find the Relics within Sir Berich's tomb. And he did. But we also found a terrible guardian -- the wraith of Sir Berich.
I brought you... Sir Roderic shouted for me to take them... the Greaves of the Crusader. The holy Relic. They're yours. The wraith used the Sword of the Crusader against Sir Roderic. I don't know how that evil thing could use the holy weapon, but it did.
You must avenge Sir Roderic by killing the foul wraith and get yourself the Sword of the Crusader!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Pelinal Whitestrake. I am the ghost of a legendary knight. Vanua is a location. Vanua is the site of Pelinal Whitestrake's death, where the Ayleid tormented him in a final act of revenge. 
Hail knight! I am Pelinal Whitestrake, whose Relics you seek with a worthy heart!
Your prayers have woken me from my endless dream. Or perhaps you have entered my dream, and I still sleep. I think others have sometimes spoken to me, others like you, but my memory is doubtful. Perhaps the others came after you. Your need must be great for the gods to allow us to speak. Has Umaril the Accursed found a way back? The foulest of a foul race. A thousand curses upon his unholy name!
I thought I'd won. But I should have known. The Slavemasters are a cunning breed. Umaril found a way to cheat death, as I could not. If you would seek for my Relics, I know little that can help you. All that has passed since my death is like mist that my mind cannot take hold of. My friends built a shrine upon the site of my death, Vanua, where the Ayleid Elves tormented me in a final act of revenge. I can show you where it once stood. Perhaps it is there still.
Fare thee well, sir knight. May the gods grant you to destroy Umaril utterly, as I failed to do.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 Garlas Malatar is a location. Garlas Malatar is an ancient temple. 
Hear my final passings of praise and wisdom!
You have stepped from the humble shadows of obscurity and into legend. No feat you have accomplished in your life compares to what you have become. You are an embodiment of Pelinal Whitestrake, the bane of Umaril the Unfeathered.
The time has come for you to fulfill your destiny. Umaril lies hid in the ancient fane of Garlas Malatar. You must go there and destroy him. Umaril's Daedric nature allows his spirit to escape into Oblivion after death. This is what Pelinal learned upon defeating Umaril the first time. You must first kill his living body. While beyond the power of most mortals, this is only the lesser of your two tasks. It will allow you to follow Umaril into the spirit realm upon his death. It will allow you to destroy him, body and soul, utterly and for all time.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Mirili Ulven. I am an obsessed botanist. 
I am Mirili Ulven, a botanist.
You're offering to help me with my research? Well... I suppose I could find a use for you, despite your lack of training. Collect some plants for me, will you?
Here's the list of things I need. Get me everything on it. Try to remember where you found it so you can tell me. It's important.
I will pay you 10 gold coins for each sample.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Haskill. I am Chamberlain to Sheogorath. Shivering Isles is a location. Shivering Isles is Sheogorath's Realm. 
I am Haskill, Chamberlain to the Lord Sheogorath.
You approach the Shivering Isles. Through the door behind me lies the realm of Sheogorath, Prince of Madness, Lord of the Never-There.
My Lord seeks a mortal to act as His Champion. Perhaps the Lord Sheogorath will find a use for you. You'll want to pass through the Gates of Madness. Oh, and mind the Gatekeeper. He dislikes strangers to the Realm.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sir Henrik. I am a ghost of a knight. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Black Marsh is a location. Black Marsh is a province. Fort Bulwark is a location. Fort Bulwark is a fort in the southeast of Cyrodiil, near the Black Marsh border. 
In life, I was known as Sir Henrik.
If you are true to the teachings of Julianos, it may be possible for you to find the Shield of the Crusader.
When the Order crumbled, I set out on my own. After years of searching, I found the Shield and brought it to Fort Bulwark for safe keeping. With the help of a few trusted friends, I began work to keep the Shield safe for all eternity. I never saw my work finished. I died defending the fort from those who would take and misuse the Shield. I never saw our work finished; I trust that the others carried on without me.
The fort lies in the southeast of Cyrodiil, near the Black Marsh border. If all went according to plan, it should be very well guarded now.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Tivela Lythandas. I am a distraught wife. Tivela Lythandas and Rythe's home is a location. Tivela Lythandas is present in Tivela Lythandas and Rythe's home. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province.  is a location. 
I'm Tivela Lythandas. I apologize that I can't give you the respect a guest in my home would normally receive, but I am at my wit's end. I am sorry to be so forward, but I desperately need your help. It seems that my husband, Rythe, has gone missing, and I just don't know what to do.
Rythe is known far and wide as one of the best painters in all Cyrodiil. His specialty is setting the Great Forest to canvas. The paintings look so amazingly real that some say they can see the trees sway in the breeze. That's a silly notion of course, but it just goes to show the attention to detail Rythe uses when he paints.
Rythe likes to work in his studio with the door locked, so no one can disturb him. He usually comes out to eat dinner and sleep, but two days ago, he didn't come out at all. At first, I wasn't worried. He does that occasionally. But when he didn't come out for a full day, I unlocked the studio with the key he said to use only in emergencies. It turned out he wasn't inside! I'm sure he never left that room. So I have no idea where he's gone.
Please. Help me find Rythe. I love him dearly, and I am so worried. Here's the key to Rythe's studio. You may come and go as you please. If you need me, I'll be around the house.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sir Juncan. I am a ghost of a knight. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a major city. Shrine of Kynareth is a location. Shrine of Kynareth is west of the Imperial City, on the edge of the Great Forest. 
My name was Sir Juncan.
I wish to see you succeed where I failed. I was on the path to the Boots of the Crusader, but died before I reached them.
I cannot tell you exactly how to find the Boots, for that will be up to Kynareth. I can tell you to seek out her Priests, though. West of the Imperial City, on the edge of the Great Forest, is a shrine. You will find them there, and they will tell you what you need to know.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sir Ralvas. I am a ghost of a knight. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city.  is a location. 
You have my, Sir Ralvas', tribute, sir knight. In three hundred years, none have passed the gauntlet. In three hundred years, we have never known hope. But for the first time, it seems that someone may succeed where we have failed. I see in you the chance to redeem our souls and restore the order. And now, I must ask you to press forward where I could not. I must ask you to face the challenge of Zenithar.
I was arrogant and foolhardy. I sought personal glory. I placed my own will and my own lust for fame over the will of the Nine. In facing the challenge of Zenithar, I failed. I tried dozens -- no, hundreds of times to reach the Mace. I fell each time. And each time I awoke in the chapel, I leaped again. I tried to enlist the help of the other knights, but none would come to my aid. The inscription says to "walk in the faith" but even now, I do not know what this means.
Below the Chapel of Zenithar in Leyawiin there is a shrine to the great craftsman, Saint Kaladas. Those seeking the Mace must pray before the shrine. When you bow, you will receive a vision -- or perhaps not. It is unclear. The priests saw that my body never moved, but it felt so real. You will see the Mace of Zenithar, separated from you by a great chasm. The chasm represents your doubt. Your faith must be your guide across it.
This is what I know. As I said, my faith was weak. I did not understand the test and I fell from the platform each time I tried to cross. I have told you all that I know. All that is left is for you to prove yourself more worthy than I. If you seek the Mace, travel to Leyawiin's chapel, kneel at the shrine in the undercroft, and let your faith in the Nine be the salvation of us all.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Knights of the Nine. I am ghost knights, followers of the Nine. 
By the strength and guidance of the Nine, who comes before us upon this sacred ground seeking the Cuirass of the Divine Crusader?
Step forward, adventurer, and face us, the Knights of the Nine, each in honorable combat. For the vows we failed to revere in life, we shall uphold in death. No unworthy soul shall lay hands upon this sacred artifact without the leave of the Knights of the Nine.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Diram Serethi. I am an innkeeper. Aleswell is a location. Diram Serethi is present in Aleswell. Aleswell is a location. Aleswell is a small town. ruins of Fort Caractacus is a location. ruins of Fort Caractacus is just to the southeast of Aleswell, the path down the hill. Ancotar is present in ruins of Fort Caractacus. Ancotar is a male wizard. 
Excuse me. I'm innkeeper Diram Serethi. We have a small problem that we hope you can help us with.
You may be wondering why you can't see me. We are all wondering the same thing. Everyone in Aleswell suddenly became invisible several weeks ago. It was sort of fun at first, but the novelty has definitely worn off now. You can imagine how difficult it is to run an inn while invisible. Once you get a reputation as a haunted inn, you can just forget about it. So we've all been keeping quiet, hoping the spell will wear off. But we're running out of patience. We're sure it was Ancotar's doing, but we can't find him. If you can help us, we will be extremely grateful.
Ancotar's a wizard who took up residence in the ruins of Fort Caractacus a couple of years ago. He's caused us no end of trouble with his magical experiments, but nothing as bad as this. We've tried to find him, but had no luck. If he's still living in the fort, he's hiding from us, and no wonder. If you could find him and get him to remove this cursed invisibility, we will all be in your debt. The ruined fort is just to the southeast of here. Follow the path down the hill. But watch out for the invisible monsters that infest the ruins!
If you make us visible again, you'd be welcome at the Aleswell Inn anytime. Free of charge.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 Wayshrines of the Nine Divines is a location. Wayshrines of the Nine Divines is shrines to the gods. 
Oh my. To what do I owe this honor? I am but a humble prophet. What business do you have with me?
You would quest for the holy panoply of Pelinal Whitestrake? The legendary Relics that have been sought by mighty warriors throughout the ages? Are you a worthy knight?
The gods grant insight to those they deem worthy. Why and how they act is not predictable. What I can tell you is that traditionally, knights who wished to quest for the Relics would walk the Pilgrim's Way.
Travel to the Wayshrines of the Nine Divines. Pray to each of the gods in turn, and ask their favor upon your quest.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Rosentia Gallenus. I am a collector of arcane artifacts, who carries a Daedric Staff. Rosentia Gallenus' home in Leyawiin is a location. Rosentia Gallenus is present in Rosentia Gallenus' home in Leyawiin. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. Darkfathom Cave is a location. Darkfathom Cave is a cave. Daedric Staff is an object. Daedric Staff is a cursed staff. 
These stupid scamps are driving me crazy! I'm at my wit's end! I, Rosentia Gallenus, beg you to help me!
The beastly little creatures are nasty, smelly, noisy and wrecking my beautiful house! I must be rid of them! I can't let people know I have scamps in here, or they'll think I've taken to Daedra worship. Try explaining that to the town guard.
I had a feeling buying that Daedric Staff would be trouble. Now I'm paying for it with more than just some gold. A few weeks ago, a spellsword was passing through Leyawiin and heard that I like to buy curiosities. He wanted to sell the staff you see me carrying. I eagerly bought it, knowing the value of Daedric relics. In fact, I was a bit suspicious when he sold it so cheap. His loss, my gain I figured. After examining it for a bit I noticed a small word carved on it in runes. Using a book from my library, I translated it. The word was nonsense. However, when I spoke it and held the staff, four scamps suddenly appeared! I thought I was done for! Strangely, they all just stood there. It didn't take long before I realized they were following me! I couldn't be seen in town with scamps following, so I decided to discard the staff. I can't explain it, but somehow I can't compel myself to actually let it go. This staff is obviously cursed! Now I'm stuck with it.
Oh please, I beg you! Take this staff to Darkfathom Cave and get rid of it and the scamps forever! I can't fight, and who knows what's guarding the shrine? Plus, do you know how dirty caves are? It'll ruin anything I wear!
Do this for me, and I'll reward you with another one of my curios I picked up a few years ago... a valuable ring. Ring of Eidolon's Edge.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Velwyn. I am a hasty man. Anvil is a location. Velwyn is present in Anvil. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. 
I'm Velwyn. You wouldn't happen to be in the market for a home would you? If you are, I just happen to be selling a manor located right here in Anvil.
I'm selling my grandfather's house, Benirus Manor. If you're interested, I could let you have it for a modest sum, 5,000 gold. I have to sell it soon, as I have pressing matters elsewhere. You're welcome to take a look at it. It is located across the street from the Chapel.
Once you buy, you get the key to the front door and the deed of ownership. That's the deal.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ocheeva. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. Summitmist Manor is a location. Summitmist Manor is a large manor house in Skingrad. 
Do you like parties? Because you've been invited to one. Of course you'll be killing all the other guests. Each guest, at some point in the past, wronged their mysterious host. Now he's hired us to exact his revenge. Are you ready to attend?
You need to go to the city of Skingrad, to the large house known as Summitmist Manor. There you will meet up with five very unlucky guests. In order to receive your bonus, you must kill each guest secretly, one by one. If anyone sees you committing murder, the bonus is forfeit. The guests believe there is a chest of gold hidden in the house, and have agreed to be locked inside until one of them finds it. In fact, the guests believe the key to the manor is inside the chest, and only by satisfying their greed will they be allowed to leave. Poor fools. There is, of course, no chest of gold. The guests will find no key. After you arrive, the doors will be locked behind you, as everyone expects. When all the guests lie dead, you will be free to leave.
Now go, see the doorman at Summitmist Manor. He will explain the rest. Have fun.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vicente Valtieri. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Marie Elena is a location. Marie Elena is Gaston Tussaud's ship. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city.  is a location. 
Warmest greetings to you. I am Vicente Valtieri. I'm eager to see how you fare on your first assignment.
Go to the Waterfront District of the Imperial City. There you will find a ship named the Marie Elena. Board the ship and find its captain, Gaston Tussaud. He'll be in his cabin. Eliminate Tussaud in any manner you see fit. As a pirate, Gaston Tussaud has certainly spilled his share of blood. Someone wants revenge, and they've hired us to extract it.
The pirates have been moving a lot of cargo onboard lately. You may be able to smuggle yourself onboard in one of the packing crates. Oh, and one more thing. Get into the habit of asking your fellow assassins about any current contract. Their insight may prove invaluable.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Maeva the Buxom. I am a regretful wife. Fort Strand is a location. Fort Strand is a marauder hideout. Rockshatter is an object. Rockshatter is a mace, and Maeva the Buxom's family heirloom. 
Perhaps you can help me. I'm Maeva the Buxom. My husband's name is Bjalfi the Contemptible. My father said I was a fool to marry him, but I didn't listen. At our wedding, my father gave us a family heirloom as a gift; Rockshatter, a mace that's been in my family for many generations.
Bjalfi snatched Rockshatter from our mantle and took off to "find his fortune" with the local Marauder gang at Fort Strand. I want that mace back. Please, I don't think he's ever coming back, and I'd hate to lose such a precious heirloom to a gang of thugs.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Azzan. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Brittlerock Cave is a location. Brittlerock Cave is a cave. Elante of Alinor is present in Brittlerock Cave. Elante of Alinor is a female scholar researching Daedra worship. 
Hello again. It's me, Azzan.
Good to see that you're looking for more work. There's certainly more to be done. I need you to help Elante of Alinor.
Elante is a scholar, interested in researching Daedra worship. Meet her in Brittlerock Cave, help her find the shrine, and keep her safe.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Nerussa. I am a wine collector. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province in Tamriel.  is a location. Shadowbanish Wine is an object. Shadowbanish Wine is rare wine from Tamriel that grants its drinker Nighteye. 
Greetings. I'm Nerussa. I'm quite fond of collecting all manners of wines from all over Tamriel. But one vintage continues to elude me: Shadowbanish Wine. How I'd love to add it to my collection.
Apparently the wine is so rare because it was only made in one tiny batch. It's the product of an alchemist who was also a vintner. Besides tasting incredible, the magic within the wine allows the imbiber to be gifted with Night Eye! The vintner made it special for the Legion soldiers posted at the forts when they were active long ago. It was perfect for keeping lookouts warm on cold nights and helping them see better in the dark.
If you can retrieve six bottles of Shadowbanish Wine, I'll gladly pay you well: 1,000 gold. All I know about them is that they're found in the many fort ruins scattered all over Cyrodiil.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 Oblivion is a location. Farwil is present in Oblivion. Farwil is Count Indarys' son, and a brash young man. 
About two days ago, Count Indarys's son, Farwil, entered the Oblivion Gate with six other men. We haven't heard from them since then. The Count fears the worst, and has posted guards here so we can watch and see if anyone comes back out. So far, nothing.
At this point, Count Indarys is offering a reward for the recovery of his son from inside the gate... or confirmed news of his demise. If you find him or the rest of the Knights of the Thorn, get them out of there. I'm sure that the Count would also be pleased if the gate was closed.
The Knights of the Thorn are a bunch of rabble who fancy themselves true knights. Farwil formed the group around two years ago. They make grand boasts, and talk a good talk, but that's all they are. The real work goes to us, the City Guard. I hate to speak ill of them, as something horrible may have happened, but their own bravado got them into this mess.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Raminus Polus. I am the player's superior at the Mages Guild. Arcane University is a location. Raminus Polus is present in Arcane University. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is a university for mages. Vahtacen is a location. Vahtacen is one of the Ayleid ruin sites on the eastern side of the province. Arch Mage's Tower is a location. Arch Mage's Tower is in Arcane University. Irlav Jarol is present in Arch Mage's Tower. Irlav Jarol is a male mage. 
I, Raminus Polus, have a new task for you, and I assure you there are no Necromancers involved.
There's a research project going on at Vahtacen, one of the Ayleid ruin sites on the eastern side of the province. Irlav Jarol is in charge of the project, and is apparently in need of some help.
I thought you might need a break, after the things you've been exposed to lately. You can find Irlav here in the Arch Mage's Tower.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vaermina. I am the lady of nightmares, one of the Daedric Princes.  is a location. Arkved's Tower is a location. Arkved is present in Arkved's Tower. Arkved is a male wizard. the Orb is an object. the Orb is one of Vaermina's relics. 
We meet again, mortal, for we have met before, whether you know it or not.
When you mutter in your sleep, you speak to me. When you waken wet with sweat, you've just left my house. I dwell in your dreams; I savor your nightmares. Now, you will serve me.
The wizard Arkved has the Orb of Vaermina... snatched from the dreams of my followers and dragged into the waking world. Travel to his tower and retrieve my Orb. Take care, though, mortal. In the Orb, Arkved has found more than he bargained for.
After proving yourself, mortal, you shall bear my token, the Skull of Corruption.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Armand Christophe. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Waterfront District is a location. Armand Christophe is present in Waterfront District. 
Ah! Our newest member. I'm glad you stopped by. I have a... situation that you might be able to help with.
The Gray Fox has asked me to take care of a problem, and I'm putting you on it. Hieronymus Lex actually collected taxes from everyone living here on the Waterfront! Your job is to recover those taxes.
The people of the waterfront are very poor. Traditionally the city has not collected taxes from them, even though by law they could. The money the city would collect would barely cover the cost of collecting. The Gray Fox has always guaranteed protection to the poor of the waterfront. He doesn't want to let this injustice stand. It's a matter of principle.
Find out where Hieronymus Lex is keeping the taxes and bring them to me. I'll also need the tax records of what each citizen paid so we can return it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Azzan. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Anvil is a location. Azzan is present in Anvil. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Quality Merchandise is a location. Quality Merchandise is Norbert Lelles' shop in Anvil. Norbert Lelles is present in Quality Merchandise. Norbert Lelles is a male merchant. 
Looking for more work, eh? Good. I have got a contract for you. I'd like you to go talk to Norbert Lelles, here in Anvil.
He runs Quality Merchandise here in Anvil. He's been having problems with break-ins, though, and he's hired us to put a stop to it. Sounds like he wants your help stopping the theft at his store.
Take care of Lelles. He needs the help.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Jensine. I am a merchant, and the chairperson for the Society of Concerned Merchants. Market District is a location. Jensine is present in Market District. Market District is a location. Market District is an area filled with stores. Thoronir is present in Market District. Thoronir is a male merchant. 
I think you may be just the kind of person we're looking for. Perhaps you can assist us with a problem we're having here in the Market District.
I'm the chairperson for the Society of Concerned Merchants. We formed this group a while back to keep a nice fair economic balance in town. Not every store is a member, but we're slowly trying to convince them to join. Everything was fine until Thoronir opened his shop nearby.
Selling all sorts of merchandise, Thoronir undercuts prices like you wouldn't believe. He doesn't always sell what we sell, but it is still a problem. People who buy tend to want to spend their money there. That leaves none for us. It's getting so bad, a few of us may have to close up shop. He outright refuses to join the Society or even discuss the matter. We are convinced he is up to no good.
What we need is for you to case his establishment, and figure out where he gets his inventory. Find some proof of his wrongdoing, and let us know. We cannot do it ourselves, as he recognizes all of us. The job pays a fair bounty in gold when he is brought to justice.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Janus Hassildor. I am Count of Skingrad. Skingrad is a location. Janus Hassildor is present in Skingrad. Corbolo is a location. Corbolo is a river in Cyrodiil. Cheydinhal is a location. Cheydinhal is a city in Cyrodiil. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city in Cyrodiil. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is the capital city of Cyrodiil.  is a location. Rona is present in Skingrad. Rona is Janus Hassildor's wife. 
I'm sorry. We've not met. I'm Janus Hassildor, Count of Skingrad. I understand you're looking for a cure for vampirism. This is fortunate, as I also seek the cure.
I wish to tell you a story so that you might understand why I would trust you with my secrets. More than 50 years ago, my wife Rona and I were both turned into vampires. While I came to embrace the changes in myself, she did not. She hated what she had become, and refused to feed to keep herself healthy. She eventually slipped into a coma from which she has not awoken. My trusted servants have cared for her all this time, but I wish for her to at last find peace. The cure is for her. I have researched what I can, but acquiring the cure is beyond my grasp. I cannot risk drawing too much attention to myself. So I would ask that you took up the search on my behalf. If you are successful, I will reward you in whatever small way I can. Will you aid me?
What little I have discovered points to the witches of Glenmoril. In the past, they have been capable of creating a cure. I have searched for these witches throughout Cyrodiil, but no covens still exist within its borders. There may be one left. I have unconfirmed reports of a woman seen near the Corbolo river, who fits the description of these witches. Seek her out, and learn whether she can help. She lives somewhere along the river, east of the Imperial City and south of Cheydinhal. If you are successful in finding a cure, report to my steward. You have my thanks.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am a Fighters Guild Champion. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. Maglir is present in Skingrad. Maglir is a new male member of the Fighters Guild. 
I'm the Fighters Guild Champion, Modryn Oreyn, as you should know. What do you want? I suppose you've come looking for duties?
I want you to contact Maglir. He's one of your Fighters Guild brothers, but he's defaulted on a contract. We can't allow that. Makes us all look bad. He didn't finish out a contract in Skingrad. Suppose I shouldn't be surprised. He's raw, like you. Go and find out what's wrong with him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Haskill. I am the player's servant. Palace is a location. Haskill is present in Palace. Fountainhead is a location. Fountainhead is beneath the Tree. 
Ah, you're back. You may have noticed that we have a... bit of a problem.
My Liege of course noticed the Font when you arrived in the Palace. The Font of Madness, in the middle of the throne room.
The taint of Order appeared only a short time ago, but it has spread quickly. As goes the Font of Madness, so goes the Realm. Soon we will all be serving a new master, Jyggalag.
Somehow the forces of Order have poisoned the Pools of Mania and Dementia that feed the Font. I suspect the traitor Thadon. Jyggalag has never had an original thought in his existence. Be that as it may. You will have to enter the Fountainhead beneath the Tree and find the source of the poison.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sir Casimir. I am a ghost of a knight. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. 
I, Sir Casimir, know where you may find the Gauntlets of the Crusader, for I was the one who lost them when I was still alive. Though many know where they are, they are still lost. I believe there is something you must do in order to retrieve them.
When the Order fractured, I followed Sir Berich into war, taking the Gauntlets with me. When it was over, I returned to this land. I attempted to return to the service of the Nine, but the war had changed me. I no longer had sympathy for the weak, or pity for the suffering. In the brief time I was there, I did more to hurt the Chapel of Stendarr than help it. It was there that I was cursed.
A beggar who came to the Chapel each day for help tried my patience one too many times. I lost my temper, and struck him. My blow landed harder than I had intended, and he fell to the floor, dead. Killed in the very Chapel of the God of Mercy. I left the Chapel at once, of course, but the damage was done. I was weak, constantly weary, and lacked the energy to do almost anything.
As proof of the deed, when I struck the poor man the Gauntlets slipped right off my hands and fell to the floor. Heavy as stone, they would not move. None could lift them. I suspect they lie there still, in Chorrol's Chapel. You must prove to Stendarr you are worthy to lift the Gauntlets once more. Seek out the priests of Stendarr in Chorrol. Perhaps they can help you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Haskill. I am a servant of Sheogorath. Shivering Isles is a location. Haskill is present in Shivering Isles. Knifepoint Hollow is a location. Knifepoint Hollow is once a great library. 
Sheogorath is gone, but hope is not lost. We have a rare opportunity here, but I hesitate to do what must be done. If the Throne of Madness remains empty when Jyggalag storms the palace, he will prevail. But there is a chance that the throne may not be empty. The only way to protect the Realm from Jyggalag is to place you in the Throne of Madness.
Unfortunately, when Sheogorath faded, the power of the Staff of Sheogorath faded with him. It must now be remade. The Staff is the symbol of power in this Realm. He who rightfully holds the Staff may hold the throne of the Shivering Isles. However, the secrets of its construction are lost.
That which is lost can be found again. There is one being in the Shivering Isles who may be able to assist you in the construction of a new Staff. The ruins of Knifepoint Hollow once served as a great library. There, you will find a door. Behind that door, you will find the answer you seek.
Take this crystal. It contains the power to open the sealed door. Inside, you will find the final remnants of the library. Be mindful of what you find there. The library is a thing of Order, and it will still serve that end.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the prince of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. Xaselm is a location. Xaselm is a village. 
Things are getting a bit thin. Get that Gatekeeper in place, and do it quickly. I'm not sure how much time I have left.
It's essential. Simply essential! If only it were essentially simple... but it's not. I want him there guarding those Gates. If any of Jyggalag's forces show up, he should be ready for them.
It wouldn't do to just let them in if more show up. And more always show up. Still and all, I think things are going well, considering! Go talk to Relmyna in Xaselm. Tell her you're working for me. She'd do anything for me, that little minx.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Unknown. I am a paranoid resident of Crucible, giving quest via "Faded Note". a roof is a location. Unknown is present in a roof. Crucible is a location. Crucible is a district of a great city.  is a location. Bernice is present in Crucible. Bernice is a female innkeeper. Caldana is present in Crucible. Caldana is a woman. Earil is present in Crucible. Earil is a man. Cutter is present in Crucible. Cutter is a woman. Brithaur is present in Crucible. Brithaur is a male thief. "Faded Note" is an object. "Faded Note" is a note. 
Faded Note
The last thoughts of one of Crucible's residents

I don't think I'll live much longer. My wine supply is thinning, only one bottle left. Bernice's wine is worthless! I would have lasted longer on bark. I'd go back home to resupply, but Brithaur, that maggot, has stolen my house. It's not just him, though, it's also the others. I can't leave the safety of the roof. They have a plan for me, I see it in their eyes. Caldana, Earil, Cutter, ALL OF THEM!
They don't know I'm up here, watching. Not much longer, though. At least they won't find me or my stash. I've put all my favorite things in an urn, and sunken it in the sewage near the back of Bernice's dive.
I think I'll drink that last bottle to celebrate.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the prince of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. Sacellum Arden-Sul is a location. Sacellum Arden-Sul is a church. Arctus is present in Sacellum Arden-Sul. Arctus is a high priest. Dervenin is present in Sacellum Arden-Sul. Dervenin is a high priest. 
Once I am gone, things usually get bad quickly.
You'll need the respect of My citizens. They'll need a leader, someone to look up to when I'm gone. They're the backbone of any great land. Except where the backbone is an actual backbone. Ever been to Malacath's realm...? Nasty stuff. But, back to the business at hand.
You'll need to control one of the Courts of Madness. Replace a current Duke. Or Duchess. Whichever. That will command respect! The people will rally around you. You'll have their love, their admiration, their complaints! Whatever. As long as it keeps them on Our side.
Speak to Arctus and Dervenin, the High Priests at the Sacellum Arden-Sul. They can explain what needs to be done.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the prince of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. Fringe is a location. Fringe is the hinterlands of Sheogorath's realm. 
The Greymarch has swept the Fringe. Order gathers its forces there as we speak. And I hate when people gather forces in My Fringe. You'll need to put an end to that. Stop them.
My armies should already be there, but I want you to see what you can do to help. If they continue to marshal their forces there, we won't be able to contain them. Make sure they can't.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Syl. I am the Duchess of Dementia, an incredibly paranoid woman. 
Why do you approach Syl, the Duchess of Dementia? Do you seek death?
You're the one the Madgod sent, aren't you? Then you're safe for now. Speak to no one unless I instruct you to. None of them can be trusted. Do you hear me? None! Surrounded by traitors and spies, I am. Always, always. They watch and wait, eager to slip a knife into my spine when I'm not looking.
Could be all of them. Every last one. None can be trusted. But they'll never take me down. Never! I'll see them all rotting in shallow graves before I let my guard down! You... you will help me. Yes, yes. You will be most useful.
You're going to find out who knows. You're going to learn who keeps secrets, who conspires against me. You will be my Grand Inquisitor. Expose the conspirators, and they will be punished, I assure you. Find out who keeps secrets, and what they are. Speak with Herdir. He will help you. Do you understand what is required of you? If no one is found, you will be held responsible.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sickly Bernice. I am a sickly woman, and the proprietor. a tavern is a location. Sickly Bernice is present in a tavern. Shivering Isles is a location. Shivering Isles is a realm. Knotty Bramble is a location. Knotty Bramble is a root cave. Aquanostrum is an object. Aquanostrum is a liquid cure that bubbles up from around an old statue. 
Oh... hello. Sickly Bernice, proprietor. Don't get too close now. You might catch what I have.
Well... it seems I am dying. Yes, these may be my last days in the Shivering Isles. That is, unless someone like yourself could help me find the cure. But no one has taken me up on my offer, even with the promise of a reward. Ah well, it's been a good life I suppose....
There's only one place in all the Isles to get the cure for what I have... Knotty Bramble. I'll mark it on your map. There, on the lowest level of the place, is a pool containing the cure: Aquanostrum. Legend has it that it bubbles up from around an old statue. Bring me back the remedy, and I will reward you well with a Circlet of Verdure. Here, take this special flask to collect the Aquanostrum.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am an unhinged king. Brellach is a location. Brellach is Sheogorath's army's stronghold. 
There's a perfect job for you, my newest and only Noble in the realm!
A messenger told me that Order has attacked my army's stronghold at Brellach and routed my soldiers! If Order has truly entered my army's stronghold, things have taken a disturbing turn. It means Order has tried subterfuge... not its strong suit. Amazing! Perhaps things aren't going as poorly as I'd imagined.
You'll want to get all the details from the messenger. Unless you already have. You haven't, have you?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Horkvir Bear-Arm. I am a manic, workaholic man. Split is a location. Horkvir Bear-Arm is present in Split. Hill of Suicides is a location. Hill of Suicides is a nasty place where people who have committed suicide end up. Split is a location. Split is a village. 
Yes, I, Horkvir Bear-Arm, can take a moment to talk with you.
I'd get more work done if it weren't for my layabout double living in town. Terrible drain on productivity. Never know who's who. It's been a problem for too long.
A wizard did it. Stupid layabout mage. Had a theory about each of us having a Manic and Demented side. He decided to test the theory. Cast a spell. Split us all in two. Do we get twice the work done? No! Ridiculous. We're not allowed to take care of it either. There are rules. And I don't want to end up on the Hill of Suicides. You, on the other hand....
Get rid of that Demented bunch. Useless, anyway. Don't get a lick of work done around Split. If you get rid of them, I'll make it worth your while.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Horkvir Bear-Arm. I am a demented, lazy man. Split is a location. Horkvir Bear-Arm is present in Split. Hill of Suicides is a location. Hill of Suicides is a nasty place where people who have committed suicide end up. Split is a location. Split is a village. 
Talking wears me, Horkvir Bear-Arm, out.
My double is always working. It takes all my energy just watching him work. It's got to stop. It's a problem, all these doubles walking around. And it's tiresome. Didn't used to be like this.
Some blasted mage. Had a theory. They've always got theories. He thought there was a Manic and a Demented in each of us. So, what does he do? What else? Casts a spell. You can see how well that went. Two of each of us walking around this place. Nothing we can do about it, either. There's a law about that here. Been to the Hill of Suicides? Not a nice place. But you might be able to help.
Only one group can stick around. Either we Demented or those blasted Manics. It's the only way we'll find any peace. You get rid of those Manics. All of them. If you can take care of that for me, I'd make it worth your while..

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Big Head. I am a madman. Fork of Horripilation is an object. Fork of Horripilation is a special fork. 
Sing for Big Head.
The Fork for Big Head. Oh, where has Master put the Fork? It sings alone. Far from home. Sad, sad Fork. Sad, sad Big Head.
The Fork! The precious, precious fork! Hear how it sings to Big Head! Beautiful, perfect Fork of Horripilation! But it is gone. Gone, gone, gone. No more singing. No more ringing. Taken from Big Head, never returned. That is when Big Head came here. Master brought me! Whispered shouts into my ear! Songs of Madgods! Songs of bad gods! Softly, Master. Softly.
It went away. But it will come back! It always comes back! It is close. Big Head can hear it! The Fork of Horripilation! Hear it singing! Songs of home! It comes again. It brings presents! It is not present. Soon it will be! You will find it! Bring the Fork! Hear the music. Music of toads. Music of roads! Sing to yourself, so all can hear!
Talk to the beggar! Talk to Bolwing! He knows secrets, but no one can hear them. No one but Big Head. Take Big Head's charm! Listen to Bolwing! His tongue is tied, but his mind is unraveled! He'll tell you the secret. Who has the Fork?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Una Armina. I am the owner of the Museum of Oddities. Museum of Oddities is a location. Museum of Oddities is a museum filled with odd things. 
Hello, I'm Una Armina. Perhaps you've heard of my Museum of Oddities? There you can view all the finest Oddities of the Realm.
I'm always looking for new exhibits, so be sure to think of me when you see anything Odd! I'm always looking for new Oddities to add to my collection. Anything unusual, bizarre, strange, or disturbing -- bring it to me! I do pay a nominal finder's fee, but of course the real reward is your contribution to posterity.
Do you have anything that you'd like to contribute to the Museum?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Hirrus Clutumnus. I am a man who desperately wants to die. New Sheoth is a location. Hirrus Clutumnus is present in New Sheoth. New Sheoth is a location. New Sheoth is a city. 
Won't someone end me? Take my life, please!
I, Hirrus Clutumnus, am in desperate need of a champion, a hero. Are you brave and fearless? There's a... a simple task. Yes, a simple task that you must perform.
This life, it's... well, it's too painful. Everywhere I look, I see death, dying, and decay. When I dream, I see a world without sunshine. I'm constantly on the verge of retching up, or falling asleep, or screaming at someone who doesn't deserve it. I'm just so fed up with it all.
I need your help. I need you to send my soul away from this world! You must... you must kill me. I don't necessarily want to see it coming. And I want to die here in the city so all these people finally believe me. They'll wish they were nicer. You probably want to do it without spectators though, so you don't get in trouble. Best to make it look like an accident. But remember, I don't want to see it coming. Take me unaware!
I'm going to go about my daily life, such as it is, as if nothing has changed. Make your move when you wish. But, please, do it soon. When you kill me, take the key to my house. Nothing really worth taking, except what's locked up in the jewelry box. You can have that.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Amiable Fanriene. I am an insomniac who is afraid of walls falling on him. outdoors is a location. Amiable Fanriene is present in outdoors. 
Hello... don't mind me... Amiable Fanriene. I'm a little tired. Can't sleep at home, you know. The walls. They aren't safe.
I need someplace to sleep. I have seen some people sleeping out on the street, but they huddle too close to the walls. I need someplace safe. I can't just sleep anywhere. There're walls and statues and all sorts of things that can fall on me. Can't have that. Nope. But... if you find me a good place to sleep, a safe place -- outside -- I'll reward you!
Remember, walk lightly, and always look up.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ranarr-Jo. I am a paranoid man. 
I'm Ranarr-Jo.
Perhaps you could help us? But why should I trust you? You might be, you know... one of Them.
Our situation is desperate, she controls our minds... but wait, I've said too much.
Talk to my Kishashi. If she will trust you, I will trust you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Count Cirion. I am the ghost of the nobleman who ruled over Vitharn. the inner sanctum of Vitharn is a location. Count Cirion is present in the inner sanctum of Vitharn. Vitharn is a location. Vitharn is a castle keep. 
I am Count Cirion, and you have violated the inner sanctum of Vitharn Keep.
However, my people and I are in need. Maybe you can help us. Centuries ago, Vitharn was overrun by Fanatics. We were soft and failed to defend ourselves. I was the weakest of all. Now, the shades of my people are cursed by Sheogorath to repeat the final moments of their failures, over and over again. You must help us break the cycle of torment.
Help my people overcome their weakness and defend Vitharn from the Fanatics. Walk among them. There were four who failed to protect the gate lever. Find out what they did wrong and help them correct it. You can put away your sword in these halls. Unlike the defending spirits, within these walls, none will war with you. Not even the Fanatics.
My people long to be laid to rest. Please help them.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
  is a location. 
My Liege. I'm glad to see you. We have a developing situation that requires your attention.
An Obelisk of Order has activated in the Palace courtyard. My guards are engaging the Knights as we speak. We will defend the Palace to the end of our strength, and will cast ourselves in the path of cursed Jyggalag himself should he come here.
You must deactivate the Obelisk to be rid of the Knights! This will be our final battle against Jyggalag and his forces of Order!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Earil. I am an annoyed shopkeeper. Crucible is a location. Earil is present in Crucible. New Sheoth is a location. New Sheoth is a city. Crucible is a location. Crucible is a district of New Sheoth. 
Brithaur's a thorn in my side that never seems to go away!
I'd have his heart on a plate if I could! I wish he'd simply disappear from the streets of New Sheoth forever! Oh look, just talking about it has given me another gray hair!
Brithaur is a thief, but what irks me the most is that he's a BAD thief. Between my shop and a few others in Crucible, he's been caught stealing maybe a dozen times last month. Who has time for this sort of thing? I mean, at this rate, I'll grow old and die before he's out of our hair! I'll tell you what I tell anyone else who asks.
Get rid of him for me and I'll make it worth your while. Do hurry... time's wasting!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the prince of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. Shivering Isles is a location. Sheogorath is present in Shivering Isles. Shivering Isles is a location. Shivering Isles is Sheogorath's realm. Xedilian is a location. Xedilian is a maze dungeon in Shivering Isles. Attenuator of Judgement is an object. Attenuator of Judgement is an item the player needs. small book, tells the player how to activate Xedilian is an object. 
I'm Sheogorath, the Daedric Prince of Madness. I've been waiting for you, or someone like you, or someone other than you, for some time.
Now? You run an errand for me. An important one. Of course, anything I tell you to do is important. My Realm, my rules. You're going to Xedilian, one of my favorite spots in the Shivering Isles. It's a little place I use to take care of unwanted visitors. And some are more unwanted than others.
There are those that have other ways into my Realm, and they're on the move. We don't want them here. Trust me. So, you're going to get Xedilian up and running. Here's a little book to tell you how, and the Attenuator of Judgement. You'll need that, too. Of course, you can always get more details from Haskill. He's a detail-oriented type of person. A big help. And a snappy dresser.
Now, get going. Before I change my mind. Or my mind changes me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ahjazda. I am a mildly paranoid woman. Crucible is a location. Ahjazda is present in Crucible. Crucible is a location. Crucible is a district of a big city. Amulet of Disintegration is an object. Amulet of Disintegration is an amulet. Ring of Desiccation is an object. Ring of Desiccation is a ring. Calming Pants is an object. Calming Pants is pants. 
So much to gather, so little time. Perhaps you can help? You might help against the coming storm.
It's coming. I, Ahjazda, think I'm the only one who sees it, though. And I'm going to be ready. Oh, yes. I'll be ready. I've been stockpiling supplies. Things I'll need to ride it out... or survive when they come for me.
I've been gathering things for quite a while, but there are still a few I'm missing. Perhaps you'd bring them to me? I still need the Amulet of Disintegration, the Ring of Desiccation, and, of course, the Calming Pants. Must have the Calming Pants. Bring these to me, and I will reward you well. Ahjazda has many, many things.
Let me teach you a special spell, Ahjazda's Paranoia, after you return with the items. It will affect all those around you. You might find it handy to cause confusion in your enemies. You know... when the time comes.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the god of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. New Sheoth is a location. New Sheoth is the capital city of Sheogorath's realm. Cylarne is a location. Cylarne is a fort. Flame of Agnon is an object. Flame of Agnon is a cold flame. 
You've seen the Great Torch that burns brightly over New Sheoth? No? Because it doesn't. It should. But it doesn't. You'll fix that. You'll go to Cylarne and bring back the Flame of Agnon to relight the torch.
Oh... and take care with my minions at Cylarne. In their eternal quest to please me, they're constantly fighting over Cylarne. It can be tiresome. But, really, it's divine. Divinely tiresome. Well. That's your problem now.
Off with you. I don't want to see you again until the Great Torch is lit. I wouldn't want to have to hurt you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Kiliban Nyrandil. I am the dungeon master. Xedilian is a location. Kiliban Nyrandil is present in Xedilian. Xedilian is a location. Xedilian is a looping dungeon that is used to get rid of unwanted people. the Manual is an object. the Manual is a manual that tells the player how Xedilian works, given to the player by Sheogorath. 
Welcome to Xedilian, I'm the dungeon caretaker, Kiliban Nyrandil.
Xedilian would normally have sent you back to the entrance when you stepped on the pad in the Resonator Chamber. Since you're up here, I can only surmise that adventurers are already entering the dungeon as we speak.
I'm afraid until the adventurers are dealt with, Xedilian will keep you here. Even I can't will its doors to open. To put it bluntly, you're stuck here for the moment. No disrespect intended.
The only thing we can do is let the adventurers complete a cycle through here. I'll be glad to help. I assume Sheogorath gave you the Manual. You can consult it for more information, or I can provide instructions.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Raminus Polus. I am the player's superior at the Mages Guild. Wellspring Cave is a location. Wellspring Cave is a cave. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a major city. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is an unusual city southwest of the Imperial City. Janus Hassildor is present in Skingrad. Janus Hassildor is the Count of Skingrad. 
I, Raminus Polus, have a new task for you.
The Council is investigating what happened at Wellspring Cave. Many of our resources are devoted to the task, leaving our ranks spread thin. There is a related book that needs to be recovered. It was recently loaned to Janus Hassildor, the Count of Skingrad. I'd like you to retrieve it.
I understand this may not seem the most important of tasks, but still... it needs doing, and you are one of the few available to do it. A note of caution: Skingrad is an... unusual place. Be prepared for the unexpected.
The city of Skingrad lies southwest of the Imperial City. You should have no trouble finding it.
You have your task. Perform it as well as you would any other.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gray Fox. I am a legendary thief, and the player's guildmaster at the Thieves Guild. Cheydinhal is a location. Cheydinhal is a city in Cyrodiil. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a region. Temple of the Ancestor Moths is a location. Temple of the Ancestor Moths is an extensive, well-guarded monastery, in the far northeast of Cyrodiil, beyond Cheydinhal. Savilla's Stone is an object. Savilla's Stone is a large crystal with special properties. 
I have need of your special gifts. There is an item, hidden away in a remote monastery. I need you to go get it for me.
The monastery is extensive and well guarded, so you should make sure to be well prepared. Should you succeed, I will pay you well for your services.
The monastery is called the Temple of the Ancestor Moths. It is where retired, blind Moth priests go to wait out the rest of their days. I will mark the location on your map. Look for it in the far northeast of Cyrodiil, beyond Cheydinhal.
I need you to acquire Savilla's Stone. It is a large crystal with special properties that I need to gain... advantage. Remember, do not shed innocent blood. However, there is no bloodprice for slaying the stone's guardians, human or inhuman. When I receive word that Savilla's Stone is missing, I will be here waiting for you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arnora Auria. I am a female thief. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city in Cyrodiil. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a major city in Cyrodiil. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Bruma Castle Dungeons is a location. Bruma Castle Dungeons is a prison in Bruma. Jorundr is present in Bruma Castle Dungeons. Jorundr is a male thief, and Arnora Auria's ex-boyfriend. 
Here's the deal. Jorundr and I have had a rocky relationship at best.
Against my will, I've been dragged all over Cyrodiil helping him commit petty crimes. I wouldn't say we're thieves. I mean, we've stolen things... sure. But we've never stolen that much at one time. Just enough to keep us going. That is, until last year.
Jorundr started to take risks and began robbing more dangerous targets. Not just lone merchants, mind you. I'm talking about the bigger scores. Like estates and tax shipments. I begged him to stop, as I knew that his capers would one day lead to violence. He just threatened to... hurt me if I got in his way. I think the gold changed him. I really do. He wasn't the man I met seven years ago. The few times I tried to say something, he'd strike me or push me away. I began to become frightened of him.
Our last score was a tax shipment being delivered to the Imperial City. We robbed it, and in the midst of the chaos, Jorundr killed a guard. I was mortified. We snatched up the gold and holed up in the mountains. He said if I breathed a word of the murder to anyone, he'd kill me. I was terrified of him at this point. Two days later, the Bruma City Guard traced us to our makeshift campsite. I was off gathering food, but Jorundr was captured. Served him right. When I went back to the site later, the gold was gone! He'd moved it! What I need you to do is go to the Bruma Castle Dungeons and speak to him for me. Convince him to tell you where the gold is and then we split it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Forsaken Mine is a location. Forsaken Mine is a troll lair. Viranus Donton is present in Forsaken Mine. Viranus Donton is the son of the guildleader of the Fighters Guild. 
I have got another job for you. It's a sensitive one. I need you to find Viranus Donton.
I sent him on a mission to Forsaken Mine. He and some others were supposed to clear the place of trolls. Haven't heard back from them in days. I want you to go check it out. I don't need to tell you how sensitive a matter this is.
We'd been contracted to clear the place of trolls. It was a tough job, but I felt the men I sent were up to it. I want to know what happened.
Get moving, and report back to me as soon as possible.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gray Fox. I am a legendary thief, and the player's guildmaster at the Thieves Guild. Old Way is a location. Old Way is an old escape route of Imperial Emperors. Imperial Sewers is a location. Imperial Sewers is sewers. Imperial Palace is a location. Imperial Palace is a palace. Elder Scrolls is an object. Elder Scrolls is mystical scrolls that simultaneously archive both past and future events, the Gray Fox needs one. Savilla's Stone is an object. Savilla's Stone is a stone that reveals secrets to its fielder. Boots of Springheel Jak is an object. Boots of Springheel Jak is boots that allow the player to leap to unreachable places, they also protect the player from long falls. Arrow of Extrication is an object. Arrow of Extrication is an item needed to unlock the final door. 
This is the big one. This is the heist that will be written about and talked about for decades to come. We are going to steal one of the Elder Scrolls from the Imperial Palace. Are you ready for this challenge?
There is no buyer. This is for glory, not for money. Our names will become legend. I also have a personal need for this particular scroll. As for your compensation, I ask you to trust me. If my plan works, you will get a reward worth far more than mere money.
I have worked for eleven years planning this heist. Savilla's Stone provided the last bit of information I needed. The Elder Scrolls are kept in the Imperial Palace behind a door that cannot be breached. Savilla's Stone has revealed a path around this door. You will have to travel the Old Way. Once used as an escape route for Imperial Emperors, it has been forgotten for centuries.
The Old Way can be found in the Imperial Sewers. Here is the key for the gate to that section of the sewers. My scrying with Savilla's Stone has provided clues, but not the details. I know the tools you will need there, but not the obstacles themselves. The Boots of Springheel Jak will allow you to leap to an unreachable place. They will also protect you from a long fall. The Arrow of Extrication is the only way to unlock the final door. Take them both.
Once you are inside the Palace itself, you need to find the reading room. The blind priests will deliver a scroll to you there. I arranged for the notable Celia Camoran to want to read a particular Elder Scroll. Don't ask how. However, she will be... unavoidably detained. You will take her place. Do not speak to the priests. They are blindfolded and will not realize it isn't her unless you speak. As the guildmaster, I am waiving bloodprice for anyone you kill during this heist. However, I can't stop the Watch from putting a price on your head.
I have written it all down for you in this book. I've chosen you because you are the best. Good luck.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am S'Krivva. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Bravil is a location. S'Krivva is present in Bravil. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Imperial City Prison is a location. Imperial City Prison is a prison. Lady Umbranox is present in Anvil. Lady Umbranox is a noblewoman ruling over Anvil, an Umbranox. Dairihill is present in Anvil. Dairihill is Lady Umbranox's dishonest steward. 
S'Krivva gives you greeting. Hieronymus Lex must be eliminated once and for all. The Gray Fox has asked that you do this personally. It is a most delicate matter.
Lady Umbranox of Anvil, is hunting for a new captain of her guard. The Legion Commander of the Imperial Watch sent her a list of candidates. The Gray Fox wants this list replaced with one that highly recommends Hieronymus Lex. From Anvil he can do little harm to the guild. The letter carrying the list is currently in steward Dairihill's desk. She has lied to Lady Umbranox, telling her that the letter has yet to arrive.
For reasons unknown to this one, the Gray Fox has extended his protection to the Umbranox family and Lady Umbranox in particular. While Lex is a problem for the guild, his unwavering loyalty and resolve make him the perfect protector for Lady Umbranox.
You will have to track down a forger on your own. I don't know of any in Bravil. With the forged letter in hand, sneak into the Legion Commander's office in the Imperial City Prison and seal it with his seal. Dairihill cannot be trusted. You must deliver the letter to Lady Umbranox in person.
Remember, this is a mission of stealth, not blood. Your payment will be higher than normal to cover the expense of the forgery.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Slythe Seringi. I am a worried man, giving quest via "Slythe's Journal". Kvatch is a location. Kvatch is a great city. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is the capital city. Sandstone Cavern is a location. Sandstone Cavern is the offering place of the Sunken One. "Slythe's Journal" is an object. 
Slythe's Journal
by Slythe Seringi

As midnight approaches, I still watch the fires burn. The great city of man, Kvatch, lay in ruins. They didn't heed my words. They didn't listen to my voice. Now, they are all paying the cost of ignorance. The Sunken One strikes swift and hard. He swats those who oppose Him as if they did not exist at all. The excuses of man fall upon deaf ears. The Sunken One has no pity; He has no mercy, He only sits below and passes sentence. And now, with a mighty stroke, He's toppled one of man's pitiful blights on His land. And yet, He still hungers. His appetite is voracious. Kvatch will not be the last city to fall by His hand. The world of man grows more and more corrupt, and it angers Him. Man's lies and deceit will be his undoing as The Sunken One grows impatient and no longer waits for or accepts the proper offering.
The burden is mine to shoulder. I am the last who knows of He Who Shakes The Ground. If I do not bring him the Offering, who knows what city may fall prey to his whim? Anvil? Chorrol? Or perhaps He will turn his eyes on the greatest boil of all, the great Imperial City itself. No, I must not let that happen. I must get the Offering to him like my father did before me. Man may be fallen in His eyes, but they must have time to learn The Sunken One's teachings. Destroying man now would be a waste, when I am certain that given the chance, they will come to see His ways. Yes, I will do this thing. I will brave the depths of Sandstone Cavern to see Him. My weapons will be my will and my word. The Sunken One will watch over me and guide me. I must depart soon, before it is too late. If anyone finds this journal, let them know that I, Slythe Seringi, do this for the good of all man.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vicente Valtieri. I am the player's superior at the Dark Brotherhood. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Francois Motierre is present in Chorrol. Francois Motierre is a marked man. Languorwine is an object. Languorwine is a rare poison, one drop in bloodstream will mimic the effects of death immediately. 
I, Vicente Valtieri, have a special contract that needs fulfillment. In truth. I don't wish to offer it to any other guild member. I've come to rely on your abilities.
We're usually called upon to take a life, but not this time. This contract requires us to stage the assassination of a marked man.
You must go to the city of Chorrol and break into the house of Francois Motierre. Inside you will find Motierre waiting for you. Do not kill him! You see, Francois Motierre is a marked man. He owes a considerable sum to the wrong kind of people. So, they have sent an enforcer to kill him. This is an unusual contract, Motierre had to make a special arrangement with us before it was approved. I trust in your professionalism.
Here, take this knife. The blade has been coated with a rare poison called Languorwine. One drop in a normal human bloodstream will mimic the effects of death immediately. I will provide you with a vial of antidote, which will be used to revive Francois Motierre after you successfully stage his death. You should also know that there's only enough Languorwine on the blade for this one contract. After Motierre is sliced, the knife will be useless.
As payment, I'll be pleased to award you this amulet, Cruelty's Heart.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Azzan. I am the player's superior at the Fighters Guild. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city. Cirroc is present in Bruma. Cirroc is a male priest. Stone of St. Alessia is an object. Stone of St. Alessia is an important religious artifact. 
I've only got one more thing on my plate for you, but it's an important one. The Stone of St. Alessia has been stolen from the Bruma Chapel.
I don't know if you're religious, but a lot of folks are, and the Stone is important. Talk to Cirroc in Bruma. He'll fill you in on the details.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Kud-Ei. I am a mage. Leyawiin is a location. Kud-Ei is present in Leyawiin. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is a school for mages. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a town. Henantier is present in Leyawiin. Henantier is a careless male mage. 
Kud-Ei. I don't suppose you could help me locate my friend Henantier could you? If you find him, I'll be glad to offer you a sizable reward.
I miss Henantier so. We were study-mates at the Arcane University and we've come to grow fond of each other over the years. He's always getting himself into jams with the careless ways he performs his experiments, and well, I'm afraid he's done it again.
I'm going to level with you, as you seem like you wish to help. Henantier isn't missing. On the contrary, I know exactly where he is. The problem is he's trapped and there's no way I can free him.
Follow me. We aren't going far, so no need to prepare for a long journey. In fact, Henantier's still in town. More I can't say aloud without risk of others hearing.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am S'Drassa. I am an evoker and alchemist, and a member of the Mages Guild. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a city. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is an university for mages in the Imperial City. Julienne Fanis is present in Arcane University. Julienne Fanis is the female head of the Alchemy Headquarters. Garridan's Tears is an object. Garridan's Tears is magical crystals called Tears, frozen tears of Garridan Stalrous. 
S'Drassa of the Mages Guild. Evoker and Alchemist. Could you assist me in acquiring something for my crystal collection?
I'm searching for some specific crystals known as Garridan's Tears. I want you to bring me as many of Garridan's Tears as you can find. If you do, I will pay you a fair bounty in gold for each one. I confess I have a weakness for crystals of a magical nature, and I must add these to my collection. This is a personal errand, you must understand. Just between you and I. The Mages Guild has nothing to do with it.
The Tears are not just a namesake. They're literally the frozen tears of a knight named Garridan Stalrous who lived many years ago. I'm not certain what happened to the knight, or why the tears were frozen, but I do know someone you could ask. Seek out Julienne Fanis at the Arcane University in the Imperial City. She oversees the Alchemy Headquarters there. If anyone can help you get more information on about these crystals, she can.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gruiand Garrana. I am a master speaker. Cyrodiil is a location. Gruiand Garrana is present in Cyrodiil. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a realm.  is a location. 
I am Gruiand Garrana. You would seek to better yourself?
First, I would ask that you look to the poor and the suffering around Cyrodiil. Travel to all of our cities, and speak with the unfortunate souls forced to beg for change. Look into their hearts, and then look into your own.
Return to me when you have spoken with all of them. Then we shall talk of training.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Jauffre. I am a military leader. Cloud Ruler is a location. Jauffre is present in Cloud Ruler. Cloud Ruler is a location. Cloud Ruler is a military fort. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city near Cloud Ruler. Steffan is present in Cloud Ruler. Steffan is a male gate guard who has seen the spies. Captain Burd is present in Bruma. Captain Burd is a male captain of the guard. 
I hope you can help. The gate guards have reported seeing strangers on the road for the past several nights.
I cannot leave Cloud Ruler undefended while my men search the whole mountainside, but these spies must be eliminated. Talk to Steffan. He can tell you where he has seen them. Captain Burd in Bruma may also be able to help. I've asked the authorities of Bruma to have the guard keep an eye out for strangers.
Track down the spies and kill them. Find out what they know, and what they're planning, if possible.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Marana Rian. I am a master sneaker. 
You seek training? From me? A few too many loose lips, it seems. It's not something I want to be public knowledge, if you understand my meaning. Very well.
Simple task for you. I just dropped a favorite coin of mine into my pocket. If you can steal it from me, I'll train you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Maelona. I am an angry wife. Anvil is a location. Maelona is present in Anvil. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Flowing Bowl is a location. Flowing Bowl is a seedy tavern in Anvil, located outside the city walls near the waterfront. Gogan is present in Anvil. Gogan is Maelona's husband. Maelona's family heirloom is an object. Maelona's family heirloom is a small ring. 
I'm Maelona. How would you like to get my husband, Gogan, out of hot water?
Believe me, he'll need all the help he can get to worm his way out of this one. To think he'd fall for the gang's scheme... agh! I could kill him! I'm sorry... I'm rambling and got you confused. Let me explain.
The women in the gang use their wiles to lure men out to some remote location and rob them blind. It's been going on for some time now. The city guard hasn't done very much about it, because frankly, the men who are robbed are so embarrassed, they don't want to report it. Take for example that good-for-nothing husband of mine, Gogan. He cared more about their charms than my own.
When Gogan was, uh... with the women, they took something quite valuable from him. No... it's not what you're thinking. He was carrying a precious family heirloom with him when he was lured out to their lair. It was a small ring given to him on our wedding day. The ring belonged to my mother, and has been in the family for generations. I'm willing to give you all the money I have to get it back. 100 gold. Can you help us?
All I can tell you is that the best place to start is at The Flowing Bowl. It's a tavern located outside the city walls near the waterfront. The Flowing Bowl attracts the worst Anvil has to offer. Always be on your guard.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Adrienne Berene. I am one of the leader of the Mages Guild.  is a location. 
My research occupies nearly all of my time.
Now that I think about it, I do have a small problem concerning Erthor. He's one of the guild mages here. Think you can do something about it?
I just don't have the time to search for him again, but I do need to consult him about some notes he borrowed. You might want to ask around the Guild Hall, and see if anyone can be of some help. Let me know when he's back, and you'll have your recommendation.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Fathis Ules. I am a man employing thieves. Weatherleah is a location. Weatherleah is a farmhouse built by Albert Jemane, in the middle of nowhere. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Redguard Valley is a location. Redguard Valley is a well-known ogre den. Reynald is present in Weatherleah. Reynald is one of the Jemane brothers. 
Fathis Ules. I may have a bit of a proposition for you involving the Jemane family you so recently assisted.
It was kind of you to escort the Jemanes back to Weatherleah. However, their father, the original owner of Weatherleah left them an even greater legacy.
My tale actually begins with the father, Albert Jemane. He was once in my employ, or should I say the employ of my organization. He was very good at obtaining things from people who did not want to part with. A professional thief, to put it bluntly. He was assigned to obtain a very valuable item for me. He succeeded, but decided to keep this item for himself. An unfortunate decision.
Albert Jemane fled from Chorrol with his family, and was never heard from again. Only his small son Reynald was found, wandering alone in the wilderness. Naturally, my associates and I believed he had perished. The wilderness is, after all, a dangerous place. No place to take your family. Then, these many years later, voila! The brother reappears. It seems the rest of the family did not die in the wilderness after all.
What is the point of my tale? Albert Jemane builds Weatherleah way out in the middle of nowhere. He was a thief, not a farmer. The only reason to establish such a place would be to stay out of the Chorrol Guard's sight. I believe that the item Albert stole, which rightly belongs to me, was hidden at Weatherleah. Unfortunately, the notorious Redguard Valley Ogres ransacked the place and probably took all of the loot back with them.
If you were to obtain this item, somehow, and bring it to me, I would pay you very well for it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Reynald Jemane. I am an annoyed man, drinking his sorrows away. Cheydinhal is a location. Cheydinhal is a city. 
If I've told you once, I've told you a thousand times. I've NEVER been to Cheydinhal! I... oh, hang on. You're someone else. Apologies, my good friend, I mistook you for someone else. Always being asked about it, I am. 'Didn't I see you in Cheydinhal?', they say. Well I'm sick of it. Sick and tired, tired and sick. And perhaps a little drunk. But never mind. You look like the honest sort, so I've a job for you.
You're going to travel to Cheydinhal, and find out what sort of impostor is trying to besmirch my good name. And you're going to tell him... *hic*... You're going to tell him I am quite capable of besmirching my good name on my own. He should cease and desist immediately. There's fifty gold pieces in it for you, friend...

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sheogorath. I am the prince of madness, one of the Daedric Princes. Border Watch is a location. Border Watch is a small, peaceful village. K'Sharra is an object. K'Sharra is a prophesy. 
Another mortal dares to summon me, Sheogorath, and already I am bored. But enough about me. Let's talk about you.
I could turn you into a goat. Or a puddle. Or a bad idea. I could make you eat your own fingers. Or fall in love with a cloud. Perhaps I could make you into something useful. Let's find out.
There's a little settlement called Border Watch. It's a nice, peaceful place... and dull, dull, dull. You're going to make their lives interesting. They're a superstitious bunch. Everything is an omen or a portent. Let's make one come true. Find their shaman and ask about the K'Sharra prophecy. You are to find a way to make the first two parts of the prophecy come true. I'll take care of the rest, because it's the most fun. Now, run along.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Umbacano. I am a collector of Ayleid artifacts. Imperial City is a location. Umbacano is present in Imperial City. Nenalata is a location. Nenalata is an ancient Ayleid city. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city.  is a location. Herminia Cinna's home is a location. Herminia Cinna is present in Herminia Cinna's home. Herminia Cinna is a female collector of Ayleid artifacts, and a rival to Umbacano. 
I have another job for you. This is not quite in your usual line of work, but I hope you can help me just the same.
A rival collector has an item, the Crown of Nenalata, which I very much want to add to my collection. But she stubbornly refuses to consider any of my offers. She and I have had our differences over the years, I admit. Now she is taking this opportunity to get her revenge. I believe that you may be able to persuade her to part with the item, where I cannot due to her prejudice against me. Her name is Herminia Cinna. She lives here in the Imperial City, in the Elven Gardens district.
I hope you will succeed where I have so far failed. Afterwards, in order to bring my research on the last king of the Ayleids to its final stage, I need to go to the Throne Room of Nenalata. While I am not without means of defending myself, I believe you would be an invaluable companion on such an expedition. Your reward will be whatever plunder you wish to carry off from Nenalata. Since the Throne Room has been sealed since the time of the Ayleids, it should provide rich pickings.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am J'baana. I am a master in lockpicking. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. S'Krivva is present in Bravil. S'Krivva is a woman. 
Do you have business with me, J'baana?
You ask me to train you in lockpicking? How very arrogant of you. To think that I would aid you out of the kindness of my heart?
Since you are here, and since you want something, you are useful to me. Travel to Bravil, and speak with S'Krivva. She should have a message for me.
Until you have the message from S'Krivva, we have nothing further to say to one another.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vicente Valtieri. I am the player's superior at the guild of assassins. Imperial Prison is a location. Imperial Prison is a prison where the player was imprisoned in the past. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city.  is a location. Valen Dreth is present in Imperial Prison. Valen Dreth is a male Dark Elf, and a frail prisoner of many years. 
Back for more? It just so happens I have another contract available, one that requires an expert in infiltration.
Ever broken out of jail? How do you feel about breaking into one? The Imperial Prison, to be exact. We need a prisoner... silenced. Can you do it?
Your target is a Dark Elf named Valen Dreth. He thinks he's safe in prison. He is tragically mistaken. A prisoner recently escaped from the prison, using a set of secret tunnels connecting to the Imperial City's sewer system. It's a perfect way inside. Just outside of the Imperial Prison is a grating that leads to the sewers. It has recently been tightly locked, but I will provide a key. It should be easy enough to locate Dreth in his small cell. Besides, I think you know the way, hmmm. He he he he he.
Valen Dreth has been imprisoned for many years. His tongue is sharp, but his body is limp and frail. He will prove an easy, pleasurable kill. You will receive a bonus if you fulfill the contract without killing any of the prison guards. Now go, and may the Night Mother go with you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Seed-Neeus. I am a worried mother, and a trader. Chorrol is a location. Seed-Neeus is present in Chorrol. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Hackdirt is a location. Hackdirt is an isolated village, south of Chorrol. Etira Moslin is present in Hackdirt. Etira Moslin is a female trader. 
I'm Seed-Neeus. I don't mean to impose, but I'm hoping you can help me. My daughter, Dar-Ma is missing and I don't know what to do.
Dar-Ma never came back from Hackdirt. I'm dreadfully worried something may have happened to her. Can you help?
Dar-Ma was supposed to make a delivery to Etira Moslin in Hackdirt, so I would start there. Hackdirt is a rather isolated village, south of Chorrol. We do some business with the trader there. Small volume, but she pays well. Normally I make the deliveries, but I wasn't feeling well so Dar-Ma insisted on going this time. In case it may be useful, she was with Blossom -- her horse, I mean. Dar-Ma loves that animal, and would never willingly abandon her.
If you find my daughter, you have my friendship and gratitude to the end of my days!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sanguine. I am the lord of revelry, one of the Daedric Princes. Castle Leyawiin is a location. Castle Leyawiin is a castle in Leyawiin. Countess is present in Castle Leyawiin. Countess is the somber noblewoman who rules over Castle Leyawiin. 
Ah... another mortal come to beg Sanguine to add a bit of spice to an otherwise drab existence. I would have you perform a service for me.
The Castle Leyawiin is a dull, dreary place. The mistress is an especially somber soul, and tomorrow she will hold another excruciating dinner party. I want you to liven it up. Use this spell on the Countess and her guests. I think it will make the party much more interesting. You should probably try to be inconspicuous. Or they might kill you. Oh, and the party is by invitation only. You'll have to find a way in.
Have fun!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Daravyn the Gray. I am a thief hiding from the guards, giving quest via "Long Forgotten Note". Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a city. Rosethorn Hall is a location. Rosethorn Hall is a manor house. "Long Forgotten Note" is an object. "Long Forgotten Note" is a note. riddle, "Two bodies have I, though both joined in one. The more I stand still, the quicker I run." is an object. 
Long Forgotten Note
by Daravyn the Gray

My love,
I write this with trembling hands. The guards are after me, and I have nowhere else to turn. Soon they will be at the doors to Rosethorn Hall, and nothing will keep them from taking me away back to that horrible prison. I don't know how they found me; perhaps it was that traitor, Delgariun. Whoever told them I was hiding in your home must have known both of us very well. I know Delgariun has eyes for you, I know he's the one that framed me in the first place and had me sent to that dank hole in the Imperial City. He has to be the one. Beware of him, my love. He's treacherous and only wants you to get to the treasure. I didn't give it up to the guards, and I won't give it up to Delgariun. I've hidden the treasure within the walls of Rosethorn Hall. Remember the toy we played with as we ran through this place as children?
Remember the riddle we had for it? It was our secret code: "Two bodies have I, though both joined in one. The more I stand still, the quicker I run."
The key to the treasure lies with the answer. Take care of it, my love. It is your ticket far from Delgariun. Do not fret, I've escaped once, I shall do so again. Soon we will be together, and the sun will shine upon us.
Daravyn the Gray

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sinderion. I am an alchemist. Shadeleaf Copse is a location. Shadeleaf Copse is a part of the Great Forest northeast of here. Nirnroot is an object. Nirnroot is a rare root plant. Elixir of Exploration is an object. Elixir of Exploration is a multi-purpose potion for dungeon explorers. Imperial Alchemy Symposium is an object. Imperial Alchemy Symposium is a convention for alchemists. 
So, you've brought something for me to examine?
Yes, this is a genuine Nirnroot sample. Very nice quality in fact. Hmmm... that gives me an idea. Since you already know what they look like, do you feel up to a bit of a collecting expedition?
A few years ago, an adventurer not unlike yourself sold me a musty old tome containing alchemical formulas. Most of them were worthless. But one of the moldy pages contained the recipe for a potion known as an Elixir of Exploration, a sort of "ultimate dungeon delver's" brew. The formula looked sound, except it required an extremely rare ingredient. Yes, you guessed it, the Nirnroot. I put the book aside, because frankly, I had so many other delicate experiments going on that I just didn't have the time to go plant hunting. Now that you're here, that changes things.
The Elixir of Exploration is a multi-purpose potion that was obviously created with the dungeon explorer in mind. The formula describes many magnitudes of the brew. If you're interested, I wrote a short missive about it for the Imperial Alchemy Symposium. You bring me 10 samples of Nirnroot, and I'll make the Elixir of Exploration available to you at a huge discount as well as give you one for free.
The best place for you to start would be Shadeleaf Copse, which is a part of the Great Forest northeast of here. Good luck, and hurry back with more of the Nirnroot!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Corrick Northwode. I am a vengeful widower. Harm's Folly is a location. Corrick Northwode is present in Harm's Folly. Harm's Folly is a location. Harm's Folly is Corrick Northwode's home village. Exhausted Mine is a location. Exhausted Mine is a goblin den. 
Please... I implore you, help me, Corrick Northwode, avenge my wife's death!
Barely a week ago, I left Harm's Folly to go buy supplies as I usually do once a month. What a fool I was to leave my wife alone. The goblins must have been watching me, as they knew right when to strike. I could hear her screams from far away. Those wretched beasts killed her! Filthy animals! Had I only been there to stop them!
I'll tell you how you can help. Go to Exhausted Mine. Kill those goblins. Every last one of them! They destroyed everything I hold dear! In their greed, the creatures grabbed a jade amulet off of Kayleen's... body. Bring me back that amulet, so I may use it to remember her by.
Please, I'll give you six gems as a token of my gratitude. They're all I have left of value, but you must have them if you do the deed.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Teinaava. I am a fellow member of the Dark Brotherhood, and a Shadowscale. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Black Marsh is a location. Black Marsh is a province inhabited by Argonians. Bogwater is a location. Bogwater is a swamp far south of here, on the southern end of Cyrodiil. Scar-Tail is present in Bogwater. Scar-Tail is an Argonian Shadowscale, Ocheeva and Teinaava's childhood friend, and a royal assassin of Black Marsh who escaped his duties. 
Ah, dear friend, may I steal a moment of your time? I have a rather delicate situation I was hoping you could help me with. This is a personal matter, and will have no bearing on your standing within the Dark Brotherhood. Would you like to hear more?
Now, the details. Far south of here, on the southern end of Cyrodiil, lies a swamp called Bogwater. Hiding in that swamp you will find an Argonian Shadowscale named Scar-Tail. Kill this renegade. and bring me his heart as proof of the deed.
I have some history with Scar-Tail. When Ocheeva and I trained with the Dark Brotherhood as children, we befriended another initiate, a Shadowscale by the name of Scar-Tail. The three of us were inseparable. When our training was completed, we reluctantly parted ways. But now... Now, the unthinkable has happened! Scar-Tail has fled Black Marsh and refuses to fulfill his duties as royal assassin! This is an act of treason! This treachery must be punished! Just as a member of the Dark Brotherhood cannot kill a fellow family member, a Shadowscale is forbidden from slaying another Shadowscale. That is why you must go to Bogwater and eliminate that treacherous snake!
Please kill Scar-Tail, so Ocheeva and I can put this matter behind us.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Oleta. I am a restoration master. Kvatch is a location. Oleta is present in Kvatch. Kvatch is a location. Kvatch is a city. 
Greetings, traveler. You would seek restoration training from me?
Your courage is admirable, but now is not the time. Once Kvatch is safe from these attackers, then we might speak of training.
While Daedra still roam free in Kvatch, I can think of nothing else. When my city is safe, then I will train you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Azzan. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Anvil is a location. Azzan is present in Anvil. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Arvena Thelas is present in Anvil. Arvena Thelas is a woman. 
A contract for you? I, Azzan, think I've got something that suits your experience. Arvena Thelas has some problem with rats in her house.
As I said, rats. I'm sure she can explain it to you better than I. She lives here in Anvil. Go and talk to her.
Go take care of the rats. Then talk to me. Good luck!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Thadon. I am Duke of Mania, a Felldew addict. Chalice of Reversal is an object. Chalice of Reversal is a chalice that makes the world a much brighter and happier place after eating Felldew. Felldew is an object. Felldew is an addictive drug. 
Ahh yes, THERE you are! You couldn't imagine how long I, Thadon, the Duke of Mania, have been waiting for you. So little to do, and so much time. Hmm, could you, in fact, imagine just how long I've been waiting? I don't think you could, but I might be wrong.
It felt like rather a long time, but then long times get longer when you're standing around thinking about them. A curious thing, that. Long roads get longer too, if you're thinking about them, but what about long words? They don't change nearly as much. Long, short -- it all ends up the same. Dust and tears. Usually tears first, then the dust. Dust can't cry, you see. That would be... well, amusing. You know what's NOT amusing? I don't have my Chalice of Reversal. It makes me sad. When I get sad, I don't care to do much of anything. I certainly don't care to help people who show up on my doorstep wanting something. Are we getting the picture here?
The Chalice of Reversal is one of my favorite toys. Does wonders for creativity. Well, not by itself, but it helps. Is this making sense? Look, you eat the Felldew, then use the chalice, and find the world a much brighter and happier place. Honest. But I don't have it. So I can't eat Felldew, because that would just be bad. I mean, really bad. Find my chalice!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lerexus Callidus. I am a guard. Greyland is a location. Greyland is a house just up the road. Kylius Lonavo is present in Greyland. Kylius Lonavo is a male Dunmer Skooma dealer. Skooma is an object. Skooma is an illegal drug. 
Hmmm. Perhaps you'll be able to assist me. I'm after some Skooma dealers.
A small group of Skooma dealers led by a Dunmer named Kylius Lonavo is holed up in the Greyland house just up the road. I've been trying to catch Lonavo for months, but every time I approach the place, his lookout sees me and he goes running. I need someone to go in there and put a stop to those fetchers. I don't care what it takes. We must get that poison they're selling off the street.
Bring me Lonavo's ring as proof he's... been dealt with... and I'll give you the bounty on him. Be vigilant. Lonavo is a snake.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am S'jirra. I am a devastated woman.  is a location. Jumbo Potatoes is an object. Jumbo Potatoes is large potatoes cultivated by S'jirra. 
Ohhhh... what am I, S'jirra, to do? They're gone... all gone.
Can you help me find my lost Jumbo Potatoes? Please, you must help me find them! If I don't have them for the next batch of my famous potato bread, I don't know what I'll do! My potatoes are like my children. I care for and nurture each one individually. That way, they grow up to be big and strong. How stupid I was to leave them outside all alone like that! All I wanted to do was give them some sun. Next thing I knew, they were gone!
I saw someone running off to the west, but I'm too frightened to journey into the woods alone. Please... can you help me? I'll give you my famous potato bread. I swear!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Peryite. I am the lord of natural order, one of the Daedric Princes. Realm of Peryite is a location. Realm of Peryite is . 
This one moves! A welcome change. So, mortal, you have found my shrine, and you have seen my followers. They are an embarrassment to me, Peryite.
The fools cast a spell in the hopes of summoning me to them. It was prideful and foolish, and it has had its consequences. My followers are trapped between worlds; their bodies here on this plane, their souls in Oblivion. I would have you reunite the bodies and the souls.
I will transport you to the plane of Oblivion in which they are trapped. Find their souls. When all are collected, I will return you here.
You shall have Spell Breaker, with my blessing. May it bring you order.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arch-Mage Traven. I am the player's guildleader in the Mages Guild. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city.  is a location. Jeanne Frasoric is present in Bruma Mages Guild. Jeanne Frasoric is a female mage who leads the Bruma Mages Guild, and constantly sends letters to Arch-Mage Traven. 
I am unable to look into something that has been brought to my attention. Are you capable of going on my behalf?
Please go to the Bruma Mages Guild; I have not heard from Jeanne Frasoric for a few days now, which is unusual for her. While I welcome the break from correspondence with her, I worry that something may be amiss, given recent developments.
Find out if Jeanne is all right, and let me know if she needs anything.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ocheeva. I am the player's superior at the Dark Brotherhood. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. Leyawiin, in the City Watch barracks is a location. Adamus Phillida is present in Leyawiin, in the City Watch barracks. Adamus Phillida is a recently retired Imperial Legion officer who spent his entire career investigating the Dark Brotherhood, and a powerful man. Rose of Sithis is an object. Rose of Sithis is a magic arrow specifically enchanted to kill its target, cannot pierce armor. 
I have another assassination contract for you.
Do you recall the name Adamus Phillida? The Imperial Legion pest? It's time he joined Death in the Void. Think you're up to the task?
Adamus Phillida has spent his entire career investigating the Dark Brotherhood, interrupting our contracts, killing our family members! We tried to eliminate Phillida, of course, but failed on three separate occasions. He's a powerful man, and was surrounded by powerful associates. Now the Legion's pig's years of service have come to an end. He has retired. Phillida must not be allowed such a victory! His destiny is... darker. Phillida now resides in Leyawiin, in the City Watch barracks, an honored guest of the soldiers there. He is, in fact, more vulnerable than ever.
The Black Hand has sanctioned the Rose of Sithis. It is a magic arrow specifically enchanted to kill its target. In this case, Phillida. As long as the arrow hits Phillida, he will die. But it cannot pierce armor! Shoot while Phillida is armored, and the Rose will be wasted. Travel to Leyawiin. Track Phillida. Learn his schedule. Observe when he removes that blasted Legion armor! And then, let fly the Rose of Sithis! Kill Phillida in any way, Rose or not, and the contract is complete. But to receive a bonus, you must go beyond murder. You must send a message! Once Phillida is dead, take the very finger from his corpse, the one that bears an Imperial Legion signet ring! Deposit this finger in the desk of Phillida's successor, in his office in the Prison Barracks, in the Imperial City! Do this, and the bonus is yours.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the Speaker for the Black Hand, and the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood, giving quest via "Orders". Fort Farragut is a location. Lucien Lachance is present in Fort Farragut. Cheydinhal Sanctuary is a location. Cheydinhal Sanctuary is one of the guildhalls of the Dark Brotherhood. Fort Farragut is a location. Fort Farragut is Lucien Lachance's private refuge, a ruined fort located in the forest northeast of the Cheydinhal Sanctuary. Ocheeva is present in Cheydinhal Sanctuary. Ocheeva is the leader of the Cheydinhal Sanctuary. "Orders" is an object. "Orders" is a message to the player. 
Orders
by Lucien Lachance

Eliminator,
You have served the Dark Brotherhood well in the short time you have been with us. Indeed, the rate of your advancement has been rather remarkable. Now the Black Hand itself is in need of your abilities.
You must proceed with all haste to my private refuge in the ruins of Fort Farragut, located in the forest northeast of the Cheydinhal Sanctuary. When you arrive, we will discuss the nature of your special assignment.
I cannot stress to you enough the importance of your swift arrival at Fort Farragut. There are unseen powers working to unravel the very fabric of the Dark Brotherhood. The Black Hand is counting on you to prevent this disaster.
Do not share the contents of this message with anyone at the Cheydinhal Sanctuary, including Ocheeva, and make no mention of your journey to Fort Farragut! Also, be warned -- my refuge within Fort Farragut is guarded by denizens who will attack any interloper on sight. Get through these rotting sentinels and you will surely have earned the right to visit my private sanctum.
Lucien Lachance

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martin. I am the player's friend. Mankar Camoran's Paradise is a location. Mankar Camoran is present in Mankar Camoran's Paradise. Mankar Camoran is a dangerous man, and the player's enemy. Mysterium Xarxes is an object. Mysterium Xarxes is a ritual. Amulet of Kings is an object. Amulet of Kings is a powerful artifact. 
I have everything in place for the ritual. I'll open the portal whenever you're ready. I don't know what you'll find in Camoran's Paradise. I do know the portal I create through the Mysterium Xarxes ritual will close behind you. You'll have to find another way back.
I believe that Mankar Camoran acts as the "anchor" for Paradise, just as a sigil stone anchors an Oblivion Gate in place. Kill Mankar Camoran, and you will unmake his Paradise.
Farewell, my friend. Our fate is in your hands. Bring back the Amulet of Kings. Brace yourself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Agronak gro-Malog, "Gray Prince". I am a friendly fellow arena fighter. Bloodworks in the Imperial City is a location. Agronak gro-Malog, "Gray Prince" is present in Bloodworks in the Imperial City. Crowhaven is a location. Crowhaven is a ruined fort far to the west of the Imperial City, and Agronak gro-Malog's birthplace. 
Hail, friend. I don't believe I've ever seen you down here in the Bloodworks before. Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Agronak gro-Malog.
I grew up here in the Imperial City, but I was born elsewhere. My mother was a servant in the employ of Lord Lovidicus, and resided at his fortress. Lady Lovidicus was a shrew of a woman. The Lord and my mother grew close, and ultimately fell in love. I was the result of their union. When the Lady learned of my birth she was furious, and threatened to kill both my mother and me. So we fled, leaving my claim to nobility behind.
My mother died recently. Before she passed, she gave me this key, and told me it would "unlock the truth," at the place of my birth, Crowhaven. Crowhaven is a ruined fort far to the west of here. I'd go myself, but my training regiment doesn't allow for the luxury of such an excursion.
My friend, you must travel to Crowhaven and use the key to unlock whatever it is that holds the proof of my birthright! Find this proof and return it to me, and I'll share with you some of my finest combat techniques. Trust me, you can't learn these moves in a book!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Jauffre. I am the player's ally. Luther Broad's Boarding House is a location. Luther Broad's Boarding House is an inn in the Elven Gardens district of the Imperial City. Baurus is present in Luther Broad's Boarding House. Baurus is the player's male ally who may have learned something about the assassins. 
We must try to recover the Amulet before the enemy takes it out of our reach. You should go back to the Imperial City. Baurus may have learned something about the assassins.
You'll find Baurus at Luther Broad's Boarding House in the Elven Gardens district of the Imperial City.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Fort Farragut is a location. Lucien Lachance is present in Fort Farragut. Fort Farragut is a location. Fort Farragut is a ruined fort. Cheydinhal Sanctuary is a location. Cheydinhal Sanctuary is a hideout belonging to the Dark Brotherhood. Ocheeva, Vicente Valtieri, Antoinetta Marie, Gogron gro-Bolmog, Telaendril, M'raaj-Dar, Teinaava is present in Cheydinhal Sanctuary. Ocheeva, Vicente Valtieri, Antoinetta Marie, Gogron gro-Bolmog, Telaendril, M'raaj-Dar, Teinaava is fellow members of the Dark Brotherhood. 
I have been waiting for you, assassin. We have not spoken in some time, but I am well aware of your accomplishments within the Dark Brotherhood. That is why I have sent for you. I'm afraid there is a... situation.
The time has come to test both your skill and your loyalty to Sithis. The Black Hand has learned that the Dark Brotherhood has been infiltrated. By whom, and for what purpose, we do not yet know. What we do know is that there is some link between the traitor and the Cheydinhal Sanctuary. The traitor has tainted that place beyond repair. It was learned that the traitor has been active for quite some time, since before you joined the Brotherhood. That absolves you of any suspicion.
The Black Hand has chosen you to perform the ancient rite known as Purification. Everyone inside the Sanctuary must die! You must break one of the Tenets you have sworn to uphold. I know this is an unexpected turn of events, but drastic measures must be taken. Ocheeva, Vicente Valtieri, Antoinetta Marie, Gogron gro-Bolmog, Telaendril, M'raaj-Dar and Teinaava. All of these family members must die! From this point forward, you are no longer bound by the Five Tenets! Sithis will forgive any murder, any theft, so long as you serve the Black Hand!
When the rite of Purification has been completed, return to me here at Fort Farragut, and we will discuss your future. Now, take these special gifts. They will help you greatly. One is a poisoned apple. The other, a unique scroll of summoning. Good luck... assassin.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Seridur. I am an elderly vampire hunter, and the leader of the Order of the Virtuous Blood. the sanctuary of the Order of the Virtuous Blood in the Imperial City is a location. Seridur is present in the sanctuary of the Order of the Virtuous Blood in the Imperial City. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city.  is a location. 
It's an honor to finally meet you. When I heard you were in town, I just had to send for your help. Your reputation precedes you. Oh, allow me to introduce myself. I am Seridur.
Welcome. You're now in the sanctuary of the Order of the Virtuous Blood. Few outside our circle have ever set foot in our hallowed hall. We are, for lack of a better word, defenders. We guard this city from an infestation that plagues it. We are vampire hunters. I'm sure you are familiar with those despicable beings. Feeding on the innocent as if they were cattle. Well, this group was formed to combat them. Alas, we are but 3 old men, not able to match the fighting prowess of the vampire. We lack the strength to defeat them in battle.
Our goal is to root out the vampires that live in our fair city. So far, we've been unsuccessful finding one until now. It's come to the Order's attention that Temple District resident Roland Jenseric is a vampire, and has already claimed one victim. That's where you come in. We want you to slay this vampire and cleanse the city of his filth before he can feed or kill again.
A few nights ago, I was roaming the city as I often do, looking for any signs of a vampire. As I headed past Roland's house I heard a cry. I rushed into the back garden to find Roland struggling with a woman he'd been courting. I tried to intervene, but he was too strong. He threw his lover to the ground and turned his attention on me. Luckily, I managed to run back into the street and escape his grasp. I hid for a while and then returned to the garden. Roland was gone and the woman was dead. She had two puncture marks on the nape of her neck. That's when I realized he was a vampire. The Order needs you to track him and destroy him.
I would start by searching his home. He hasn't been there for days, so it should be safe. Return to us here if you have questions. We meet at night.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Glarthir. I am a paranoid town eccentric. Great Chapel of Julianos is a location. Glarthir is present in Great Chapel of Julianos. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a town.  is a location. Great Chapel of Julianos is a location. Great Chapel of Julianos is a large church in Skingrad. Bernadette Peneles is present in Skingrad. Bernadette Peneles is a woman who has been kind to Glarthir. 
Ah, you came. You're sure you weren't followed? Good, I thought I could trust you. Nobody else in town.
They're all in on it ... all watching me. Well. Yes. I need you to do something for me. I'll pay you -- gold. You like gold, don't you? Lots of gold.
Here's my problem. I'm being followed. Watched. Marukhati Selectives, maybe. Not sure. I'm a threat, you see? To their plans. I know too much. I need you to check out some people for me, the ones that are following me. Watch them, see where they go, who they report to. Will you help me?
Today I caught Bernadette Peneles watching me. I have very little doubt now that she is one of them. This saddens me. I had thought her one of the few to show me kindness in this nest of treachery. But now it seems that it was all a lie.
Be outside my house at 6 am, you'll see her watching me. See where she goes and who she reports to. We'll meet here again tomorrow night. Oh, and NEVER contact me in public. They're watching. They can't know you're helping me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Umbacano. I am a collector of Ayleid artifacts. High Fane is a location. High Fane is an ancient Ayleid settlement known by a different name today. 
You have proven yourself more than a simple grave robber. I believe you can handle a more complicated assignment. Are you interested?
Here, take a look at this sketch. The ancient texts refer to this site only as the "High Fane." Do you know it? Your first task is to locate the ruins of the High Fane. I believe it must now be known by a different name.
The High Fane dates from the Late Ayleid Period, following the fall of White Gold Tower, a very troubled time for that ancient people. A time I find most fascinating. The drawing on the bottom of the page I gave you depicts a carved panel from the central chamber of the High Fane. I believe this carving will shed new light on Ayleid history, if I am able to examine it closely. I would like you to retrieve it for me.
You will need this as well. It is the key to the inner chamber of the High Fane. I part with it reluctantly, so guard it well. It is what began my search for the High Fane, many years ago.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Burz gro-Khash. I am the player's rude superior in the Fighters Guild.  is a location. Lord Rugdumph gro-Shurgak is present in Lord Rugdumph gro-Shurgak's estate. Lord Rugdumph gro-Shurgak is an Orcish nobleman, and an old old family friend of Burz gro-Khash. 
I'll assume you're back for more work, because I don't see a big need to chat with you.
I've got more for you. Important stuff, actually. You need to go talk to Lord Rugdumph gro-Shurgak. He's an Orcish noble. A fine man. Our families go back a bit. Anyway, his daughter is missing.
Head to his estate and talk to him. Find his daughter. And mind your manners! I don't want you embarrassing me!
Now go help Lord Rugdumph. And wipe that smile off your face!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Nocturnal. I am the mistress of shadows, one of the Daedric Princes. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city spanning waters. Eye is an object. Eye is one of Nocturnal's artifacts. 
Night among strangers. Secrets in the dark. Nocturnal is here.
But my Eye is blind and drowned, stolen from its shrine, and hid in dark waters. To steal from a god is most unwise. In Leyawiin, two Argonians think themselves secret, but the Eye has seen them.
Find these thieves in the city that spans the waters. Learn where they hide my Eye. Retrieve the Eye of Nocturnal, mortal, and return it to me, and I shall look favorably upon you.
You, mortal, may take this Skeleton Key upon your return. It shall open the secrets of dark places for you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lithnilian. I am a researcher of Welkynd Stones. Bramblepoint Cave is a location. Bramblepoint Cave is a natural cave. Welkynd Stones is an object. Welkynd Stones is aquamarine colored crystals native to Ayleid ruins. 
Ten years of research down the drain!
I've been studying the Welkynd Stones. Yes, the aquamarine colored crystals usually native to Ayleid ruins. It seems I'm the first to discover them growing in a natural cave. That's about all I can say about it.
I don't suppose I could convince you to help me recover my research notes? I was doing some research in Bramblepoint Cave, and suddenly I was attacked. I grabbed everything I could and ran, but I fear I dropped my notes. Those notes are very important to me and represent ten years of my life. If you could recover them, I'd be sure to reward you appropriately with some potent potions.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arch-Mage Traven. I am the player's guildleader in the Mages Guild. Arcane University is a location. Arch-Mage Traven is present in Arcane University. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is a school of mages in the Imperial City. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a major city. Fort Ontus is a location. Fort Ontus is a fort. Caranya is present in Fort Ontus. Caranya is a female mage, eager to explore the powers of the Necromancer's Amulet. Necromancer's Amulet is an object. Necromancer's Amulet is a dangerous amulet, one of the relics of Necromancers. 
Caranya insisted on removing the Necromancer's Amulet from the Arcane University. She said it posed a threat to the safety of the Imperial City.
While I do not doubt that Caranya was right, I question whether her motives were genuine. She seemed all too eager to explore its power. I fear she is not safe from the minions of the King of Worms.
Caranya is at Fort Ontus; please, go there and return with the Amulet. Help her to see that she should not use the weapons of the enemy, especially out of fear.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am a fellow assassin, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #2". Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. Applewatch is a location. Applewatch is a farmhouse. Perennia Draconis is present in Applewatch. Perennia Draconis is the matron of the Draconis. "Dead Drop Orders #2" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #2" is a note. 
Dead Drop Orders #2
by Lucien Lachance

The Necromancer Celedaen is dead, and you are not. That is quite an accomplishment. But your work as a Silencer has just begun.
Your next assignment requires you to eliminate not just one target, but five. An entire family, in fact. The unlucky kin are Perennia Draconis, Matthias Draconis, Andreas Draconis, Sibylla Draconis and Caelia Draconis. The locations of most of the family members are unknown, so you should begin your search with the family matron, Perennia, who resides at the farm called Applewatch.
You must discern the locations of all the Draconis family members and then systematically eliminate them. I suggest you first speak with the mother and find out if she has any valuable information on the whereabouts of her children, before ending her life.
When every member of the Draconis family lies dead, journey to the city of Skingrad. In the castle courtyard you will find a well containing your reward for the Draconis contract, as well any further assignment I might have.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Azzan. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city.  is a location. 
Greetings! Looking for some more work, are you?
Good to see you're working hard. I've got some more thieves for you to deal with in Anvil. There have been a number of thefts in the area, and witnesses believe the thieves are holed up nearby. Check around, and see what you can learn. I'm not sure the numbers you'll be dealing with, so I'm sending you with another new recruit. Maglir. I believe you two have already met.
Get moving. You need to get rid of those thieves.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Namira. I am the lady of decay, one of the Daedric Princes. Anga is a location. Anga is a dark dungeon. 
You dare approach Namira's shrine, Child of the Light? You, who walk this plane basking in the light of the warm, cruel sun?
Prove to me that you deserve my favor. In Anga, my Forgotten have lived in peace for many years. They worship me from the dark, basking in their misery and filth. Now, though, some would seek to bring light to their darkness.
Priests of Arkay have intruded upon their squalor. I want you to help my Forgotten kill these priests of the Light. Cast this spell upon the priests. Allow my beloved Forgotten to kill the interlopers. When this is done, I shall reward you for your efforts.
You shall have my ring. Let it bring pain to others who would wish it upon you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Dagail. I am a master of mysticism. 
Training, child? You would know more about the mystic energies of the world around us?
The barriers between planes are weak. Do more to strengthen them; seal the portals to Oblivion. Then we shall speak of training.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Burz gro-Khash. I am the player's rude superior in the Fighters Guild. Harlun's Watch is a location. Harlun's Watch is a village. Drarana Thelis is present in Harlun's Watch. Drarana Thelis is a woman. 
I've got one more contract for you, meat. I assume you can handle it. I need you to investigate some disappearances at Harlun's Watch.
We've been contracted to find out what's happened. Speak to Drarana Thelis for all the details.
Get going.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Raminus Polus. I am the player's superior in the Mages Guild. Arcane University is a location. Raminus Polus is present in Arcane University. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is a university for mages. Mystic Archives is a location. Mystic Archives is archives within the Arcane University. Tar-Meena is present in Mystic Archives. Tar-Meena is the Mages Guild's female specialist on magicka arcana. 
I'd like you to speak with Tar-Meena at the Mystic Archives. She is our specialist on magicka arcana, and has been helping gather information.
I believe we have been asking her the wrong questions, taxing her too much with vague attempts to make sense of all that we know. Speak with her specifically about these Black Soul Gems. If she knows anything about their powers or creation.
Her expertise in arcane knowledge and lore could be invaluable to us, if we can make proper use of it. She can likely be found in the Archives now, poring through materials on Necromancy. She stops only to sleep, at the Arch-Mage's request.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ocheeva. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city with many districts. Faelian is present in Imperial City. Faelian is a male high Elf, who fancies long walks, living somewhere in the Imperial City. Adamus Phillida is present in Imperial City. Adamus Phillida is a male Imperial Legion captain, who has dedicated his life to eradicating the Dark Brotherhood. 
In the Imperial City there lives a High Elf who must be removed from existence. Finding this person may prove... challenging. Are you interested?
Your target is a High Elf named Faelian. He lives somewhere in the Imperial City, and fancies long walks. Unfortunately, that's all we know. We don't know which district he calls home, which establishments he frequents, or anything about his schedule.
This contract will require a bit of detective work. I suggest you to speak to your fellow Brothers and Sisters and see if they can offer any advice. Ah yes, there is one more thing. The Imperial City is also home to an Imperial Legion captain named Adamus Phillida. Phillida has dedicated his life to eradicating the Dark Brotherhood. He will not tolerate our operations within the Imperial City.
When that happens, he tends to make our lives uncomfortable. Let's not give the good captain any reason to go poking around in our affairs, hmm? If possible, do away with Faelian someplace out of the way. Definitely indoors, with no other people around. A secure location, with no witnesses. This will make it look like a simple murder. Phillida will be none the wiser, and you'll receive a nice bonus.
Now go, and may the Reaper of Souls go with you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Maglir is present in Bravil. Maglir is a man, and a fellow Fighters Guild member. 
I'm going to need you to find Maglir again. The little fetcher.
The little vermin has defaulted on another contract. I need you to go babysit him again.
Wish I knew what happened. He had a contract for a local mage in Bravil. Didn't seem like a particularly difficult assignment. He hasn't reported to the client at all. Get yourself down to Bravil and find Maglir.
Make sure that contract of his gets done. And send him to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Molag Bal. I am the tormentor of men, one of the Daedric Princes.  is a location. Melus Petilius is present in near Brindle Home. Melus Petilius is a good and honorable man. Cursed Mace is an object. Cursed Mace is a mace. 
Another mortal come to do my bidding. I, Molag Bal, only wish suffering and death. You will bring me both. I want to see a man brought to the edge. And pushed.
Near Brindle Home you will find Melus Petilius. A good man. An honorable man. He disgusts me. He has sworn an oath: never to raise a weapon against another man again. I want him to break that oath, and damn himself forever.
You will let him kill you with this: the Cursed Mace. As you are doing this for me, I'll save your miserable life. Probably. Get out of my sight.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martin. I am the player's friend. Miscarcand is a location. Miscarcand is the dangerous ruins of an Ayleid city. Great Welkynd Stone is an object. Great Welkynd Stone is the third item the player needs for the Mysterium Xarxes ritual, and a rare larger variant of Welkynd Stones valued by mages and occultists. Welkynd Stones is an object. Welkynd Stones is small magical crystals. Mysterium Xarxes is an object. Mysterium Xarxes is a mysterious book of rituals. 
While you were gone, I've made some progress in deciphering the Mysterium Xarxes ritual.
The third item we need is a Great Welkynd Stone. You may have run across lesser Welkynd Stones; they are fairly common in Ayleid ruins. But a Great Welkynd Stone will not be easy to come by. They have been plundered one by one over the years, due to their great value to mages and occultists.
There is only one place that is rumored to still contain one: the ruins of the Ayleid city of Miscarcand. A place where many have perished seeking its Great Welkynd Stone. But nothing else will do, so you must succeed where all others have failed.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am S'Krivva. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Imperial City Waterfront is a location. Imperial City Waterfront is a poor district in the Imperial City. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. Methredhel is present in Imperial City. Methredhel is a fellow member of the Thieves Guild, a woman. Hieronymus Lex is present in Imperial City Waterfront. Hieronymus Lex is the male captain of the Imperial Watch. 
I have a small problem that you may be able to help with. The guild will even pay a reward.
That buffoon, Hieronymus Lex, has invaded the Imperial City Waterfront. Imperial Watch guards from all over the city prowl the streets. Hieronymus Lex has vowed not to leave until the Gray Fox is in custody. The Fox is safe, but the Thieves Guild cannot do business like this. The poor of the Waterfront are kindred to the Gray Fox, and will not betray him. However, cubs soon get hungry. Soon someone will break. Many guild members could be jailed.
Find Methredhel in the Imperial City. She is co-ordinating the guild's response. Shadow hide the hunter.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Meridia. I am the lady of light, one of the Daedric Princes. Howling Cave is a location. Howling Cave is a den of necromancers. 
By the detritus of the profane, I am brought forth. And by your offering, you have made the profane your interest, mortal.
The undead are foul, unnatural things. Some of my rivals take pleasure in these abominations. Not Meridia. I wish these creatures destroyed. Hidden behind a door, deep in Howling Cave, are necromancers. They rob graves for the materials to raise their undead armies.
Find these necromancers. Destroy them and their abominations. Do this, and earn the gratitude of Meridia. You shall have the Ring of Khajiiti and go with my blessing.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Palonirya. I am a master merchant. Septims is an object. Septims is a currency. 
Training? Well, my dear, good business sense is just something that comes naturally to me. You've got to have the know-how, or else I can't teach you anything at all.
Do you have what it takes? Do you even know what it takes? Gold, that's what! Septims, and lots of them! Show me that you've got the starting capital, at least ten thousand in liquid assets.
Afterwards, I'll help you learn how to put it to good use.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Marius Caro. I am Count of Leyawiin. Leyawiin is a location. Marius Caro is present in Leyawiin. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. Mazoga is present in Leyawiin. Mazoga is an Orc woman who claims to be a knight. 
Marius Caro, by grace of the Gods, Count of Leyawiin. You are a stranger to me, but well-met. Perhaps you would like to do a service for Leyawiin?
I need your help. An Orc named Mazoga here claims to be a knight, but will not reveal her business. Find out why she is here, and report to me, and you will earn a reward suitable for those who serve Leyawiin.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #5". Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is a province far away from Cyrodiil. Stonewall Shields is a location. Stonewall Shields is a shop in the Market District of the Imperial City. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. Alval Uvani is present in Cyrodiil. Alval Uvani is a traveling male Dunmer merchant skilled in Destruction spells, a native of Morrowind. "Dead Drop Orders #5" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #5" is a note. 
Dead Drop Orders #5
by Lucien Lachance

If you're reading this note, Shaleez is dead. You've done the world a great service, Silencer. It's time to continue the good work.
Your next target is a traveling Dark Elf merchant by the name of Alval Uvani, who is currently renting a house in the city of Leyawiin. Uvani is a well-respected tradesman back in his native Morrowind, but his business often takes him very far from home. Therein lies the problem. Alval Uvani's wife has become disillusioned with her husband's repeated, extended absences and wishes to dissolve their marriage, and has sought the Dark Brotherhood's assistance. Lucky for us Cyrodiil is a bit beyond the reach of Morrowind's Morag Tong.
Alval Uvani is currently traveling around Cyrodiil, and is never in one place for more than a couple of days. In this dead drop you will also find a schedule detailing the Dark Elf's whereabouts; use it to locate him and plan your elimination. Be aware, however, that because he is forced to travel alone to the farthest reaches of the Empire, Uvani has learned to defend himself. He is a master of the Destruction school of Magicka, and is no stranger to killing.
When Alval Uvani lies rotting, journey to the Market District of the Imperial City. There you will find a shop called Stonewall Shields. Your dead drop is located behind that building, in a hollowed-out tree stump. As usual, you will find your reward for the previous contract, as well as information on your next.
Ah yes, I must mention one last detail. Apparently Alval Uvani suffers from a rare Dark Elf condition, a serious allergy to honey. If you could somehow get Uvani to drink the honey-based mead, perhaps by replacing his food, he would suffer from complete paralyzation. This would certainly make the Dark Elf a bit easier to deal with.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Nonwyll Cavern is a location. Nonwyll Cavern is a cavern. Donton house is a location. Donton house is Viranus Donton's home. Galtus Previa is present in Nonwyll Cavern. Galtus Previa is a fellow member of the Fighters Guild, a missing man. Viranus Donton is present in Donton house. Viranus Donton is a fellow member of the Fighters Guild, Vilena Donton's son. 
I've got another job for you, slightly off the record. You'll be going on a mission with Viranus Donton. Yes -- the guildmaster's son.
You're to accompany him, and make sure he succeeds. He needs some time in the field, to get his confidence up, or he'll never become a good warrior. Vilena coddles the boy too much. Doesn't want him in the line of fire. Suppose it's no surprise after Vitellus.
Vitellus was Vilena Donton's eldest son. Good man. We lost him on a botched mission recently. You've probably seen the other wounded around. If you're smart, you'll steer clear of the subject around the guildmaster. Perhaps you and I will have time to discuss it more later.
Viranus' mother's been holding him back, protecting him. You'll go to Nonwyll Cavern with him. Galtus Previa was lost there, and you're to find him. And not a word of this to the guildmaster! Go find him. He'll be in the Donton house, most likely. And bring him back in one piece!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Malacath. I am the lord of monsters, one of the Daedric Princes.  is a location. Lord Drad is present in Lord Drad's estate. Lord Drad is a nobleman. 
You want something from Malacath? Then, if you're smart, you do what I tell you.
Lord Drad took my ogres. Says he owns them. Lying maggot! They're MY ogres! Lord Drad put my little brothers in chains, working in the mines. I don't like that.
Get over to Lord Drad's estate. Let my ogres loose, and get them out! Okay? Get going!
You get a present, Volendrung. Be nice to my little brothers!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Alawen. I am a master archer. 
Why do you bother me, stranger? You make far too much noise.
You wish to learn? Hmm. You have potential, I see, but your equipment! A true marksman is only as good as his bow. When you have a good, solid Elven bow, then I shall teach you what you need to know.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Raminus Polus. I am the player's superior in the Mages Guild. Dragon's Tongue is an object. Dragon's Tongue is flowers. Redwort is an object. Redwort is flowers. 
It is unfortunate that we should meet under these circumstances, Associate. You have been found guilty of theft. As such, your guild privileges have been suspended. If you wish to be reinstated, you must perform a service for the guild. Are you willing to do so?
Make no mistake: this task is simple, but has a purpose. In selflessly serving the guild, at risk to yourself, while putting your own feelings aside, you prove your devotion to the cause. You will help replenish alchemical supplies for the guild.
Deliver 20 Dragon's Tongue flowers, and 20 Redwort flowers to me. Surprised? Annoyed? It is not unexpected. Nevertheless, that is your path to re-acceptance in the guild.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Mephala, 'Webspinner'. I am the queen of lies, one of the Daedric Princes. Bleaker's Way is a location. Bleaker's Way is a village. 
I'm Mephala. Call me 'Webspinner'. Pluck but a single thread, and the weave unravels.
In Bleaker's Way, two families, Nord and Dunmer, live in perfect harmony. But beneath the surface lurks the secret seed of strife. Kill the leaders of the two families. Plant evidence to implicate the other family as the killer. And don't get caught. Be cunning. Don't spoil my scheme. And don't die... that would spoil everything. Ha-ha-ha-hah!
And there'll be a little needle to help you stitch your own tangled tapestries: the Ebony Blade.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Armand Christophe. I am a member of the Thieves Guild, and the Doyen of the Gray Fox. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. Amantius Allectus is present in Imperial City. Amantius Allectus is a man. 
Everyone is here, let's begin.
Each of you is seeking membership in the Thieves Guild. The Thieves Guild is not a myth. We are followers of the Gray Fox, and I am his Doyen.
Merely by finding me, you have passed the first test. It's unusual for us to have three potential recruits at the same time. Rather than the normal test of skill, I'm going to make this a contest. Methredhel, you know the rules. However, for Amusei and the newcomer, let me state them clearly.
Whoever brings me the diary of Amantius Allectus, without killing him, will be invited into the guild. It's somewhere in the Imperial City. The beggars will help you locate it, for a price. I can sell you lockpicks if you need them.
One more thing. You cannot kill each other during this trial. We may be thieves, but we're not murderers.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Raminus Polus. I am the player's superior in the Mages Guild.  is a location. 
Before you can begin work for the guild, you'll need to do something for yourself. Every mage carries a staff. It is crafted and enchanted by the guild, and is a symbol of status. You need such a staff.
The wood used for staves comes from a grove to the northeast of the Imperial City, near Wellspring Cave. Several mages tend to the grove, and should be able to assist you. Speak with either Zahrasha or Eletta when you arrive.
And choose wisely.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am J'bari. I am a master trainer in light armor. 
If you want training from me, you're going to have to get something for me first.
I need a new Elven cuirass. Nothing fancy, nothing enchanted. Just a decent piece of armor. You get that for me, and I'll train you. That's the deal.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martin. I am the player's friend, and the future Emperor. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. High Chancellor Ocato is present in Imperial City. High Chancellor Ocato is the head of the Elder Council. Oblivion is a location. Mehrunes Dagon is present in Oblivion. Mehrunes Dagon is an evil god. 
While you were gone, I sent a messenger to High Chancellor Ocato. He waits for us in the Imperial City.
Chancellor Ocato is the head of the Elder Council. The Council rules in the Emperor's absence. I don't expect any objections from the Elder Council, but we should defer to their authority.
Let's go to the Imperial City at once, before the enemy can recover from Mankar Camoran's death. Until we light the Dragonfires, the Gates are open, and Mehrunes Dagon's invasion continues.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vangaril. I am an exiled mage, giving quest via "Weathered Journal". Lost Boy Caverns is a location. Vangaril is present in Lost Boy Caverns. Lost Boy Caverns is a location. Lost Boy Caverns is a cave with catacombs. Erandur is present in Lost Boy Caverns. Erandur is a male necromancer, Vangaril's friend who become a lich. "Weathered Journal" is an object. "Weathered Journal" is a journal. 
Weathered Journal
by Vangaril

Long have I sought to purge the evils haunting Erandur. Even when his necromantic studies resulted in our mutual expulsion from the Guild of Mages, I persisted in guiding him towards good with a gentle hand. Alas, in our exile, my old friend has mired himself in the foul practice, and in shocking discovery I learned he had become a miserly disciple of the Worm King, a cunning wraith. A Lich.
Frail memory strengthened by dogmatic resolve, the Archmages turned me away when I came to them with my discovery. My pleas for a detachment of battlemages ignored, only my long-past expulsion remembered. And thus, the grave duty falls only to me. I must bear the burden of purging the Lich that was once a friend.
I wander now into the foreboding maw of these catacombs known as the Lost Boy Caverns, far from the climes of common elves and men. With pure spirit and rites of cleansing, I hope to strike down the fearsome Lich and set free the soul of Erandur, but I leave this testament behind, lest I may never return from these depths; as a warning to those who may follow my path.
Faithful, even in Exile,
Vangaril

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Dagail. I am a confused mage. 
You seek wisdom from me, child? Ah, no. You seek words of recommendation. Words are... difficult. They come and go. The voices, though. So loud they are, they drown out the words. Without my amulet, my stone to lock the voices away, the words will never come and stay. Would you lift your hands to help another, to help me find the words?
Seek Agata, child. She will see the path, and set you on it. She may be young, but her heart is old and wise. It guides her well through these troubled times.
I must rest.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Marius Caro. I am the Count of Leyawiin. Leyawiin is a location. Marius Caro is present in Leyawiin. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. 
You and Mazoga are to find and kill the leader of the Black Bow Bandits, the Orc named Brugo.
In her shadowy past, your friend Mazoga might have had contacts with outlaws. Ask her about locating Brugo and his Black Bow Bandits.
I have created a chivalric Order of the White Stallion. If you succeed, I will bestow on both you and Mazoga the titles of Knights-Errant of the White Stallion for your service to Leyawiin.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am S'Krivva. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. Theranis is present in Skingrad. Theranis is a male cat burglar, and a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. "Lost Histories of Tamriel" is an object. "Lost Histories of Tamriel" is a book. 
We meet again. I have need of a very special book, the "Lost Histories of Tamriel".
The cat burglar Theranis was sent hunting in Skingrad for this book. However, Theranis has not been seen since. The Gray Fox himself hunts for this book.
I need you to find Theranis. Help Theranis bring back this book. If Theranis is unwilling or unable, bring back the book yourself.
Go to Skingrad. The trail starts there.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Guilbert Jemane. I am a grateful man. Weatherleah is a location. Weatherleah is the childhood home of Guilbert Jemane and Reynald Jemane, where no human has lived for years. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a town. Fort Carmala is a location. Fort Carmala is a fort.  is a location. 
I can't thank you enough for helping to reunite me with Reynald. I never would have guessed he was still alive. We have much to discuss, but if you have time, I'd beg you stay a moment longer and hear about our home, Weatherleah.
Weatherleah was our family's home for generations. Our parents fled it when ogres attacked; they became separated. My father carried me to safety. He later returned and believed Reynald and my mother had perished. Since ogres are cannibals, he didn't expect to find their bodies. Thankfully, however, it seems that my mother managed to carry Reynald to safety. While my mother didn't survive, Reynald did, and for that I'm grateful.
But we both want more - we want our home back. We're not fighters; you appear to have more skill than either of us. Would you go to Weatherleah, and see if it's still inhabited by ogres?
Now, we're not quite sure where the estate is located. We'll offer up what we know, however. We believe it's somewhere south of Chorrol, but southwest of Fort Carmala. It may be difficult to find. Since no one's lived there for many years, it may be quite overgrown by now.
If you find Weatherleah, let us know. We'll be waiting anxiously.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Countess Narina Carvain. I am a collector of Akaviri relics. Cyrodiil is a location. Countess Narina Carvain is present in Cyrodiil. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a realm.  is a location. Draconian Madstone is an object. Draconian Madstone is an Akaviri artifact, an amulet that protects its wearer from poisons of any type, looks like a snake coiled around and encircling itself: the eyes of the snake are precious gems. 
Allow me to formally introduce myself. I'm Countess Narina Carvain. I assume you've noticed all of the Akaviri relics I'm displaying.
Well, it's safe to say I'm a collector of sorts. I've invested a great deal of time and money acquiring these bits of ancient history. In fact, I'd be so bold as to proclaim my collection the most complete in all Cyrodiil; perhaps even beyond. Except for one thing.
A particular relic has eluded me for many years. Possessing this piece of Akaviri antiquity would make my collection complete. I'm of course referring to The Draconian Madstone. The stone is a fine bit of Akaviri craftsmanship. Worn like an amulet, this talisman is said to protect the wearer from poisons of any type. The talisman appears as a snake coiled around and encircling itself. The eyes of the snake are supposed to be precious gems or some such. Through my sources, I've learned that the last reported location of the Draconian Madstone was the ruins at Pale Pass.
If you retrieve the Draconian Madstone for me, I'll be happy to compensate you by rewarding you with another Akaviri artifact. Are you in the game?
Let me tell you how you're going to find the talisman. I've come into the possession of a diary written by an Akaviri messenger. I suspect that the text within can lead you to the ruins. Here's a translation of the passages we could still read. It was quite damaged. I've also included a rough map that was drawn in the diary as well. I'm also providing you with a unique key that was supposedly found with the diary. I'm assuming it will prove useful when you arrive at the site.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arch-Mage Traven. I am the player's guild leader in the Mages Guild. Cyrodiil is a location. Arch-Mage Traven is present in Cyrodiil. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a major city. White Rose River is a location. White Rose River is a river. Elsweyr is a location. Elsweyr is a province. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Nenyond Twyll is a location. Nenyond Twyll is a Necromancer lair in ancient ruins, south of the Imperial City, south of the White Rose River, nearly halfway to the border of Elsweyr. Mucianus Allias is present in Nenyond Twyll. Mucianus Allias is a male mage who infiltrated the Necromancers. 
Greetings. It is high time that we met face to face, don't you think? Raminus has told me good things about you. You have advanced quickly, and show great promise. I now intend to put your talents to a more direct test.
I have a difficult task that you can, perhaps, assist with. Let me explain what is at stake. The Council of Mages has been aware of the increased Necromancer activity in Cyrodiil for some time. It had been our position to sit back and watch what unfolded, but that time has clearly passed. We cannot tolerate these attacks on the guild. Most of our information on Necromancers has come from an informant inside the cult itself, a guild member who offered to infiltrate their ranks.
Though the information he has provided is limited, it has given us a sense of their scope and power. The Council was initially reluctant to believe the information was reliable, but with recent events, they have little choice but to trust it. I fear that our informant is in danger, and that is why I have called you here.
The informant is a mage called Mucianus Allias. He is not a Council member, but has long served the guild here at the Arcane University. Aware in the growing interest in the guild after the band of Necromancy was put into place, he offered to help the Council track the cult's actions. With my blessing, he infiltrated the group, and has fed us information for quite some time, until recently. I have not heard from him, and I fear for his safety.
The lack of reports from Mucianus has disturbed the Council, and they are now concerned about the legitimacy of his information. A group of Battlemages were dispatched to Mucianus's last know location, with the intent on bringing him in for questioning. I argued against it, but eventually agreed to maintain order in the Council. I regret that decision, and that is why I wish to send you there. I fear the Battlemages may mistreat Mucianus, if they do not mistake him for one of the many Necromancers no doubt present in the ruins.
I wish for you to find Mucianus, and ensure his safe return to the Arcane University. I do not want anything to go wrong. Please, hurry. The Battlemages will arrive there soon, if they have not already, and time is of the essence. If for any reason they are unsuccessful, Mucianus' life will be forfeit. You must make sure he is safe. Go now, and bring word to me as soon as he has been escorted to safety. Mucianus last reported being sent to the ruins of Nenyond Twyll, south of the Imperial City. That is where the Battlemages went. South of the White Rose River, nearly halfway to the border of Elsweyr. I'm afraid I know nothing more about the location, or what you may expect to find once you arrive.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am a Speaker for the Dark Brotherhood. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Inn of Ill Omen is a location. Inn of Ill Omen is an inn on the Green Road to the north of Bravil. Rufio is present in Inn of Ill Omen. Rufio is an old and frail man who sleeps his days away. 
You sleep rather soundly for a murderer. That's good. You'll need a clear conscience for what I'm about to propose.
I am Lucien Lachance, a Speaker for the Dark Brotherhood. And you, you are a killer. A taker of life. A harvester of souls. Your work, your deathcraft, pleases the Night Mother. And so, I come to you with an offering. An opportunity... to join our rather unique family.
On the Green Road to the north of Bravil lies the Inn of Ill Omen. There you will find a man named Rufio. Kill him, and your initiation into the Dark Brotherhood will be complete. Know that Rufio is old and weak, and sleeps his days away. You could kill him before he even has a chance to wake. If you so choose. Do this, and the next time you sleep in a location I deem secure, I will reveal myself once more, bearing the love of your new family.
Please accept this token from the Dark Brotherhood. It is a virgin blade, and thirsts for blood. May it serve you well, as does your silence.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #7". Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Ungolim is present in Bravil. Ungolim is a male Wood Elf Archer, loves a married woman. "Dead Drop Orders #7" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #7" is a note. Lucky Old Lady is an object. Lucky Old Lady is an ancient statue in Bravil, a symbol of good luck and prosperity. 
Dead Drop Orders #7
by Lucien Lachance

My compliments on another job well done! Havilstein Hoar-Blood was more swine than man, and deserved to die quivering like an animal! You must not stop! You must kill again!
Your next target is a Wood Elf named Ungolim, who resides in the city of Bravil. Bravil is also home to an ancient statue known as the Lucky Old Lady. It is seen as a symbol of good luck and prosperity, and the fools of Bravil often speak to the statue and wish for good tidings. Every night, poor lovestruck Ungolim visits the statue and pleads desperately for the heart of a young maiden. This maiden is married, and her husband has learned of Ungolim's affection for his bride. He fears the competition, it would seem, and has commissioned the Dark Brotherhood to help in the matter.
You must go to Bravil, locate Ungolim, and kill him. The Wood Elf owns a house in the city, but he spends his days securely locked inside. I recommend you lie in wait at the Lucky Old Lady statue, and then eliminate Ungolim when he arrives for his nightly visit. He's generally there between the hours of 6:00 PM and 1:00 AM.
By all accounts, Ungolim is a deadly archer and a fearless opponent. I also have reason to believe he is expecting trouble, so if Ungolim senses danger, he may attack you on sight. Be vigilant, and bring the Wood Elf down! You must not fail!
When Ungolim's body lies broken at the foot of his dear statue, you must journey to the city of Anvil. Your dead drop is in a barrel located behind the statue in the pond. As is standard, your reward and next contract will be waiting.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Carahil. I am one of the guild hall leaders of the Mages Guild. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a realm. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is a university for mages.  is a location. 
Hello there. Is there something with which I can assist you? Perhaps you're curious about joining the Mages Guild?
All right, then. You're now an Associate of the Mages Guild. Congratulations! You'll need to receive a recommendation from each local guild hall in Cyrodiil to advance in the guild, and be given any sort of responsibility. They can be done in any order, but they all must be sent in to the Council before you can enter the Arcane University.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Valus Odiil. I am an old warrior turned farmer, and a worried father. Chorrol is a location. Valus Odiil is present in Chorrol. Odiil Farm is a location. Odiil Farm is Valus Odiil, Rallus and Antus' farm, not far from Chorrol. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a town. Weynon Priory is a location. Weynon Priory is a monastery. Rallus, Antus is present in Weynon Priory. Rallus, Antus is Valus Odiil's two sons. 
My sons! Have you seen my sons Rallus and Antus? They're going to fight off the creatures at our farm, but I fear for their safety.
For the last few days, we've suffered attacks from these creatures at our farm not far from Chorrol. They're coming from someplace in the Great Forest. I don't know where, but Rallus may know more by now. My boys will take up the fight even if the guards won't. Doesn't matter if it's outside the town walls - it still affects us all. They expect me to go with them, but... I fear in my old age, I'm not the warrior I once was. Would you... would you go in my place?
I'm supposed to meet them at Weynon Priory. You'd best get whatever supplies you need now, so you can get there in time.
I... I need a drink to calm my nerves. Please, excuse me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Glademist Cave is a location. Glademist Cave is a cave where the Blackwood Company has set up a camp. Ajum-Kajin is present in Glademist Cave. Ajum-Kajin is one of the leaders of the Blackwood Company. 
These certainly won't be official duties. Fact is, you'll likely be expelled from the Guild if Vilena gets wind of the fact that you're here. And I've already been expelled. Doesn't mean I'm done, though.
I'm taking down the Blackwood Company, and I want your help doing it. To bring them down, I need more information. My sources tell me they're trying to expand, and they've set up camp in Glademist Cave. I want you to go there and capture Ajum-Kajin, one of their leaders. Bring him back to me. I'd like to spend some time... talking to him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arch-Mage Traven. I am the player's guildmaster in the Mages Guild. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. Count Hassildor is present in Skingrad. Count Hassildor is a nobleman who rules over Skingrad. 
There is an urgent matter which requires your personal attention. This task falls to you, and only you.
Count Hassildor of Skingrad has contacted the Council. He claims to have information that is vital to us. He has requested that you personally travel to Skingrad to obtain this information. I cannot stress how important it is that our relationship with Hassildor be preserved. I expect you to visit him immediately.
I am unsure as to why he has requested that you, of all people, should be the one to visit him. I have no wish to put you in harm's way.
Please, travel there as soon as possible. The Count is waiting for you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. 
While the information we got from the Argonian was valuable, we need more. I want you to infiltrate them. See how they work from the inside.
I want you to get to Leyawiin and join the Blackwood Company. Find the secret of their success. You'll be on your own. Steer clear of me and all of your Fighters Guild brothers. It'll be rough going, but you can do it.
Good luck.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ruslan. I am a man. Market District is a location. Market District is a shopping district. Jensine is present in Market District. Jensine is a female shopkeeper. septim is an object. septim is a currency, coins. 
Hey stranger, can you spare a few coins? I've just been shaken down by that bastard watchman and he took my last septim. I don't know his name, but I'd recognize him if I saw him again.
Luronk and I were shopping at Jensine's when he accused us of stealing. Even Jensine said we were innocent, but he didn't care. We had to pay his "fine" or go to jail.
He's shaken down most of the shopkeepers in the Market District. They're all too afraid of him to do anything. Jensine wouldn't even talk about it.
Someone ought to do something about him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martina Floria. I am Master Enchanter for the Mages Guild. Welkynd Stones is an object. Welkynd Stones is magic crystals. 
Martina Floria, Master Enchanter for the Mages Guild.
You wish to learn illusion spells? Hmm. A trade is in order, don't you think? My services in exchange for... oh, let's say ten Welkynd Stones. I'd say that's fair.
Let me know when you have them.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arquen. I am Speaker for the Black Hand. Applewatch is a location. Arquen is present in Applewatch. Applewatch is a location. Applewatch is a farm. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Lucien Lachance is present in Applewatch. Lucien Lachance is a male Speaker of the Black Hand, who betrayed the Dark Brotherhood for some reason. Night Mother is present in Bravil. Night Mother is an immortal female spirit who is revered and worshiped by the Dark Brotherhood. 
Silencer! At last you've arrived! Fear not, for the crisis that has threatened the Dark Brotherhood has finally come to an end. I am Arquen, Speaker for the Black Hand.
As you can see, we have dealt with the betrayer, Lucien Lachance! No longer will you serve as his puppet! It seems Lachance wanted revenge against the Dark Brotherhood for some reason, and used you to do his dirty work. But now, we can begin anew!
I bestow upon you the title of Speaker. You will take Lucien Lachance's place on the Black Hand! Welcome! As you know, the Black Hand is now in a state of disarray. Lachance ordered you to kill us off! We five, including you, are now all that remain. Even worse, you killed the Listener! The Black Hand without a Listener is like a hand with no thumb. Even the Listener's successor is dead!
So, we have no choice but to invoke an ancient ritual. We must wake the Night Mother from her slumber, and seek her guidance! Between the hours of midnight and 3:00 AM, ask me about the Night Mother, and we will away to our Lady's home in Bravil. Only then will the ritual begin.
May the Night Mother hold you in her cold embrace.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Hircine. I am the lord of the hunt, one of the Daedric Princes. Harcane Grove is a location. Harcane Grove is a forest grove. 
Summoned by prey. The hare crouches before the fox's muzzle. Perhaps I, Hircine, shall task you, mortal. Set you to hunt for my amusement.
In Harcane Grove is a quarry worthy of the chase. First named, last tamed, the unicorn runs wild there. Bring me this creature's horn, mortal. If you dare. Do taste its flesh and drink its blood. Never waste the spoils of a kill.
Please me, hunter, and you shall have my token, Saviour's Hide, and wear it well. Hereafter, take your prey, and whisper my name.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. Blackwood Company hall is a location. Blackwood Company hall is the headquarters of the Blackwood Company. Ri'Zakar is present in Blackwood Company hall. Ri'Zakar is the leader of the Blackwood Company, and a battle-hardened mercenary who's spent time all over Tamriel. Hist Tree is an object. Hist Tree is an abominable tree, and the source of the Fighters Guild's problems. 
It is time for decisive action. I have one more duty for you to perform. It is clear to me what must be done. The Hist Tree must be destroyed. This tree is the source of our problems. It is an abomination of nature, and it must be destroyed. As long as the Blackwood Company has access to the sap, we are all in danger. I fear they no longer know what they do.
You must find a way to destroy the Hist, though I can imagine Ri'Zakar will have it well guarded. He's a warrior, a battle-hardened mercenary who's spent time all over Tamriel. He'll keep his prize tree locked away. You'll need to find his key.
Expect an unfriendly welcome at their hall. Finish it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Pranal. I am an old man who used to be a warrior. gold is an object. 
You desire heavy armor training from me? Goodness me, I'm retired! I'm afraid combat doesn't interest me any more.
All that matters to me now is Malene. I'm no fool. I know she'd never be interested in an old man like me. It's enough just to be around her, to be in her company.
Well, if you're dead set on learning something from me, then how about you do a little something for me, first? Something for her, to be honest.
I'd like to get her a gift of a sort. Nothing terribly fancy, and something useful... How about a nice silver pitcher, and a set of four glasses. Here's 50 gold to cover the costs, that should be more than enough. Come see me when you've got everything, and we'll talk more.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Eyja. I am a woman. Rosethorn Hall is a location. Rosethorn Hall is the player's manor. gold is an object. 
Hello, I heard you purchased the Servants Quarters for Rosethorn Hall, and I was wondering if you had anyone in mind to fill that position?
For 150 gold and a roof over my head, I'm yours. Well, to help around the house I mean.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Helvius Cecia. I am a martial artist. 
Hand to Hand training, eh? The real question is, can you fight?
You know, throw a good punch? Can you? I'd like to find out if I'm going to spend time working with you. So are you up for a sparring match?
I'll make it easy on you. I won't throw a single punch. I just want to see what you've got, anyway. So, is it a deal?
If I see you reach for a weapon, I'm calling it off. And if you can actually hurt me, I'll tell you to stop. If this goes on for too long, and I get bored, I'll stop you.
Now show me what you've got!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Malene. I am an innkeeper. Malene's inn is a location. Malene is present in Malene's inn. Moss Rock Cavern is a location. Moss Rock Cavern is a cave just north of Malene's inn. 
Thank goodness someone that can help is here! I don't know how to make this request any simpler, but to put it bluntly, Raelynn the Gravefinder must die.
A few months ago, that witch of a Necromancer decided to inhabit Moss Rock Cavern just north of my inn. I don't know what she does in there; frankly, I don't want to know. However, I do know that after she arrived, the woods at night became unsafe.
I've seen undead of all types walking in the dark woods near the cave entrance. Now, this area's getting a bad reputation and my business has waned. Every day, it seems the number of undead increase.
If someone can get into the cave and kill Raelynn, maybe we can stem the tide. Her death pays a handsome bounty. I hope you'll take advantage of the opportunity. Raelynn will finally get what's coming to her.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Barthel Gernand. I am a settler, and a family man. Crestbridge Camp is a location. Barthel Gernand is present in Crestbridge Camp. Crestbridge Camp is a location. Crestbridge Camp is Barthel Gernand's camp. Mirisa is present in Crestbridge Camp. Mirisa is Barthel Gernand's female guide. 
A word of advice! Watch for goblins if you're heading north. We ran into goblin war parties northwest of here, while starting to build a new settlement.
My family and I are still trying to figure out what to do. We spent everything we had to buy the land and supplies, so we can hardly go back.
Say, do you think you could help us? We need to get the goblins off our land so we can start building our new settlement. You should talk to Mirisa about the goblins. She's our guide and knows what needs to be done.
Take care, friend. Don't get yourself killed on our account.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Aelwin Merowald. I am an old, frustrated fisherman. Lake Rumare is a location. Lake Rumare is a lake. slaughterfish are dangerous fish. slaughterfish are enemies. 
You know, stranger, there comes a time in every man's life when he has to admit that he's lost the fight.
Well, I've fought and I've lost. Who did I lose to? Who is my great enemy? Well, don't laugh... it's a bunch of damn fish.
I'm a fisherman. Or at least, I was. Until one of those slaughterfish damn near took my leg off. I was collecting their scales, see. I had a contract with this young alchemist. You wouldn't believe what he was paying for those scales! Then last month, one of the bastards got ahold of my leg. Took me right out of the business. But this alchemist, he needs the scales right away. The alchemist was paying so much for the scales that I'm close to having enough saved so that I can retire. But now, I can't get out there to Lake Rumare -- not with this leg. I only needed twelve more scales! Can you believe it? I was so close!
I've picked up a few things in my travels. If you head out there and bring me back the twelve scales that I need, I can make it worth your time. Help an old fisherman out, won't you?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Hermaeus Mora. I am the demon of knowledge, one of the Daedric Princes. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. 
I see you have served my brethren, and now you come to serve me. I am Hermaeus Mora. Past, present, and future are as one to me.
My followers seek to perform a divination. For this, they need souls, one of each of the ten sentient races of Tamriel. You will provide these souls. I give you a spell to trap these souls. Return to me when you have finished. When you do, I will further your journey on your true path.
Do your service onto me and I give you this, the Oghma Infinium. Knowledge given by me to Xarxes is recorded within.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Varulae. I am a frustrated woman, and the owner of the Serpent's Wake. Anvil is a location. Varulae is present in Anvil. Anvil is a location. Anvil is a city. Summerset Isle is a location. Summerset Isle is an island. Serpent's Wake is a location. Serpent's Wake is a haunted ship right beside the player in Anvil. 
This is a travesty. A complete and utter travesty. The crystal ball is just sitting there in the hold, but I'll be damned if I'm going back onboard. And nobody will help me. Nobody! Not with those spirits roaming the decks. I don't suppose you'll help me? No, of course you won't...
Wait... Did you actually say you'd help me? I've been going out of my mind ever since my crew was murdered! This is my ship, you see. The Serpent's Wake. I hired the crew to sail to Summerset Isle to retrieve a family heirloom, my mother's crystal ball. They made the journey, and arrived back all right, but then... Someone murdered them! All of them! Now their spirits are haunting the ship!
The crystal ball is in a chest in the ship's hold, but I can't get to it. I made it as far as the captain's cabin, but the spirits nearly killed me! Get the crystal ball and return it to me here, and I'll make it worth your trouble. Here, you'll need this key. Thank you so much!
There will be a reward waiting for you! It's the captain's enchanted cutlass. I managed to grab it when I was in his cabin, before his spirit chased me out!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Burz gro-Khash. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. escaped prison fugitives are enemies. 
I've got something for you. Could be tough. There are some escaped fugitives for you to find, meat.
Some real hard cases got out of the Bravil prison. Been terrorizing the locals ever since. The Watch is useless, so we step in.
Apparently, there are three or four of them. Real nasty, from what I hear. You take care of them. Maybe you'll get lucky and they'll surrender.
The people of Bravil aren't talking, but you might try asking around, butter them up a bit.
Get to it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gilgondorin. I am a keeper of local legends. Niben Bay is a location. Niben Bay is a sea bay. Bawnwatch Camp is a location. Bawnwatch Camp is a camp on the shore of Niben Bay. 
So you want to learn more about the ghostly Watchman?
The Watchman looks like he may have been a sailor. No one knows where he came from, or why he looks so sad. I don't like talking about the dead like they're some kind of tourist attraction, but that spirit has been making his ghostly journey for years now. We've learned to just accept that he's there.
Every night, sure as clockwork, he appears at Bawnwatch Camp at 8 on the shore of Niben Bay. He's never harmed anyone, but most people give him a wide berth. You seem curious enough, so I'll be glad to pinpoint where he appears on your map.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am G.S.. I am a long-dead thief, giving quest via "Crumpled Note". Jeralls is a location. Jeralls is a mountain range. Pale Pass is a location. Pale Pass is a valley in the Jeralls with some ruins. "Crumpled Note" is an object. "Crumpled Note" is a note. 
Crumpled Note
by G.S.

I guess you found the message I told you about, old friend. We've traveled together for so long, and you're the only one I trust with the ring and my story.
I knew climbing into the window of that wizard's house was a mistake, but the bounty on the ring was just too enticing to pass up. They said it was worth thousands of drakes... enough to keep me comfortable for a while as I lay low. They also said the owner of the ring was out of town at some meeting of wizards or some such.
They were wrong on both counts. You'd think I'd be used to this by now, dealing with the unpredictable in our line of work. But after trying to fence the ring all over the realm, no one would touch it. Worse still, the wizard was pursuing me the entire time. I had to call in many favors to stay one step ahead of him.
I decided to strike north and make for the neighboring land. As I was crossing the Jeralls, he finally caught up to me. Two fireballs later, I found myself tumbling down a steep snowy slope into a valley. Don't know where I am, but there are ruins of some old fort here. Luckily, that fetcher didn't follow me down; I assume he gave me up for dead.
I think I'm going to stash the ring in this valley, cross the border north, and return later when I feel it's safe. I've used some old chests I found in the ruins to make sure nobody stumbles across the ring by mistake; you know, the old key to a key thing like we used to do. If I don't make it back here, and you're reading this message, then the ring is all yours, my friend. Use it well and remember me.
G.S.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Fort Farragut is a location. Fort Farragut is Lucien Lachance's hideout. Applewatch is a location. Applewatch is the farm where the player killed Perennia Draconis. 
You and I have been deceived, dear friend. We must find out who is behind this betrayal! We haven't much time... I am hunted day and night by the Black Hand! They want me dead!
Here is what you must do. Go now to your next dead drop, lie in wait, and confront whomever drops off the false contract!
Uncover the true traitor's identity, and then come see me. I'll be in hiding. Fort Farragut is no longer secure. It's under watch by the Black Hand. I'll wait for you at Applewatch, the farm where you killed the old Draconis woman. It should be empty, and safe.
Now go! And may the god of death help us all!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Teekeeus. I am one of the leader of the Mages Guild. Chorrol is a location. Teekeeus is present in Chorrol. Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Earana is present in Chorrol. Earana is a female mage who has been kicked out of the Mages Guild. 
I'm afraid I can't just write one out of hand. That would be against protocols, you see. If perhaps you can clear up a small matter involving Earana, you can prove your loyalty to the guild and earn my recommendation.
Earana and I have an unpleasant history. She does not care for Guild regulations, and errantly believes I am mis-using my powers. I have seen that she is in town. Though she has not approached me, I know she wants something.
I would like you to find out what it is. Determine what Earana's after, and how we may be rid of her. I do not want her here, spreading her lies.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #4". Fort Redman is a location. Fort Redman is ruins. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is a realm. Black Marsh is a location. Black Marsh is a realm. Flooded Mine is a location. Flooded Mine is a mine drowned with water. "Dead Drop Orders #4" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #4" is a note. 
Dead Drop Orders #4
by Lucien Lachance

J'Ghasta is dead! Well done! I was right about you, Silencer. You are a useful tool indeed. Let's see if you can continue to impress me.
You must journey now to the Flooded Mine. There you will find Shaleez, an Argonian hunter who was banished from her village near the Black Marsh/Morrowind border for the brutal murder of a Dark Elven family. Relatives of the murdered family members have located Shaleez, and demand retribution. And, since the assignment is a bit far for Morrowind's Morag Tong to handle, the Dark Brotherhood has been commissioned to perform the elimination.
Be warned, Silencer! Shaleez is a skilled and deadly hunter, and will fight like the desperate fugitive she is.
After Shaleez has been eliminated, your reward and another contract will be waiting at the dead drop located in a coffin, just outside the ruins of Fort Redman.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vilena Donton. I am the player's guildmaster in the Fighters Guild. bear pelts is an object. 
You would steal from your brothers? If you had a need for something, why would you not just ask?
I will give you a chance, though. As it is only your first offense, do not return until you have collected 20 bear pelts.
Use this time to reflect on your actions.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ocheeva. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Fort Sutch is a location. Fort Sutch is  a fort far to the west, nestled in the mountains. Roderick is present in Fort Sutch. Roderick is a male warlord. 
Far to the west there lives a fierce warlord and his company of loyal mercenaries. Your target is the warlord. Do you accept this contract?
Now listen closely. Nestled in the mountains to the west lies Fort Sutch. It is the home of the warlord Roderick and his mercenaries. Roderick has recently taken ill. He now lies in eternal slumber, kept alive only by the daily administration of a powerful medicine.
You must infiltrate Fort Sutch, find Roderick's medicine, and replace it with a poisoned bottle I will provide. But you must remain undetected! Whomever arranged this contract wants it to look like Roderick died from his illness, so discretion is essential. Attack no one! Be seen by no one! If you are detected, the poisoning will fail, and Roderick must be killed in some other manner. That will, of course, forfeit your bonus.
Roderick may lie near death, but dead he is not. Until his soul has passed, our client -- and the Grim Reaper himself -- will not be satisfied.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Armand Christophe. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Cheydinhal is a location. Cheydinhal is a city. 
The Guild has received a 'request' to obtain a unique statuette. It is a bust of Llathasa Indarys, the recently slain Countess of Cheydinhal. You will be paid a modest sum. Do you want this job?
Travel to Cheydinhal, and ask the beggars for more information about the bust.
Bring it back to me once you have it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. Rellian, Vantus Prelius, Dubok gro-Shagk is present in Leyawiin. Rellian, Vantus Prelius, Dubok gro-Shagk is 3 fellow members of the Fighters Guild who have never caused issues before. 
Back for more work, are you? Good. Some of our boys are causing trouble in Leyawiin. Looks bad for the guild.
Some of your brothers have been getting rowdy at the local tavern. I've got no problem with cutting loose, but I don't like it when we all look bad. You're looking for Rellian, Vantus Prelius, and Dubok gro-Shagk. I haven't had any trouble with them before, so find out what's going on.
I'll be waiting.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Bralsa Andaren. I am a master in Destruction spells. bear pelts is an object. 
You seek training? If I were to aid you, you would first have to assist me.
I would strip the Creators of their works... you will help with this. Bring me 20 bear pelts, as proof that you have helped tear nature asunder.
Then we shall speak of spells and teaching.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Uriel Septim VII. I am the Emperor. Oblivion is a location. Mehrunes Dagon is present in Oblivion. Mehrunes Dagon is the male prince of destruction, one of the Daedric Princes. Amulet of Kings is an object. Amulet of Kings is an important amulet. 
I can go no further. You alone must stand against the Prince of Destruction and his mortal servants. He must not have the Amulet of Kings!
Take the Amulet. Give it to Jauffre. I have a secret son, and Jauffre alone knows where to find him.
Find my son, and close shut the jaws of Oblivion.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martin. I am the player's friend. Kvatch is a location. Kvatch is a city that was destroyed by Daedra. Chapel of Talos is a location. Chapel of Talos is a large church. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city. Countess is present in Bruma. Countess is the noblewoman who rules over Bruma. Great Sigil Stones is an object. Great Sigil Stones is rare items, the player needs one of these. Amulet of Kings is an object. Amulet of Kings is an important amulet. 
We need a Great Sigil Stone. You're not going to like it. Jauffre doesn't like it. The Countess of Bruma certainly isn't going to like it. Great Sigil Stones are the anchors of Great Gates. The kind of gate the Mythic Dawn opened at Kvatch. The kind of Gate the Mythic Dawn wants to open here to destroy Bruma.
The risk is great, I know. I was at Kvatch. I saw the terrible power of the Daedric siege engine. But we have no choice. The only way to recover the Amulet of Kings is to allow the Mythic Dawn to proceed with their plan to attack Bruma.
Please, my friend. I explain myself to you so you understand me. And so you can explain to the Countess. I'm afraid she may take a bit more convincing than you.
Have the Countess of Bruma meet me in the Chapel of Talos for a council of war. That seems a fitting place to make such desperate plans.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #1". Chorrol is a location. Chorrol is a city. Hero Hill is a location. Hero Hill is a hill. Leafrot Cave is a location. Leafrot Cave is a cave. Celedaen is present in Leafrot Cave. Celedaen is an ancient necromancer, who is in the process of turning himself into a lich. "Dead Drop Orders #1" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #1" is the player's first dead drop note, on Hero Hill. 
Dead Drop Orders #1
by Lucien Lachance

Silencer,
You are now reading your first dead drop note, here on Hero Hill, which proves to me you were well-appointed to the tasks that lie ahead.
Journey now to Leafrot Cave. There you will encounter an ancient necromancer who is attempting to escape death by transforming himself into a lich. This necromancer, Celedaen, has not yet completed his metamorphosis, but is still immensely powerful, possibly too powerful to destroy if confronted directly. Search Leafrot Cave. Necromancers are wizards after all, and wizards are prolific by nature. Celedaen surely has written records, and these records may contain evidence of some kind of weakness. Perhaps there is some other way to destroy Celedaen besides a direct confrontation. But destroy him you must!
When the necromancer lies dead, journey to the city of Chorrol for your next dead drop. At the foot of the Great Oak, hidden in the bushes, is an old sack. Inside you will find your reward for killing the necromancer, as well as information regarding your next contract.
Serve me well, Silencer, and there's no telling just how far you might advance.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Burz gro-Khash. I am the player's rude superior in the Fighters Guild. Desolate Mine is a location. Desolate Mine is a mine. 
You here looking for work, meat? Maybe you want a contract?
I suppose I've got something for you. We need a weapons shipment delivered to Desolate Mine. That's your job.
Move your ass, boot.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Llevana Nedaren. I am a frustrated woman. Cheydinhal is a location. Llevana Nedaren is present in Cheydinhal. Cheydinhal is a location. Cheydinhal is a city.  is a location. Ulrich Leland is present in Cheydinhal. Ulrich Leland is the corrupted male captain of the guard. Garrus Darelliun is present in Cheydinhal. Garrus Darelliun is the male second-in-command of the guard, who is not too happy about his captain Ulrich Leland. 
You seem far too nice to be one of Ulrich Leland's men. What can I do for you?
Don't even get me started about Ulrich. That madman won't be satisfied until everyone in town is dead broke...or in jail! What in Oblivion is Ulrich doing with all that money anyway? I'm sure he's lining his pockets with the gold of the good citizens of Cheydinhal.
There's only one man who seems to care: Garrus Darelliun, the second-in-command of the guard. I hear he isn't happy with Ulrich. I don't know what you can do for us in this situation. I mean, Ulrich Leland is the Captain after all.
Perhaps you could speak to Garrus. You can find him roaming the County Hall of the castle most of the time.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Olyn Seran. I am a worshiper of Molag Bal, and a master Conjurer. Molag Bal's Shrine is a location. Olyn Seran is present in Molag Bal's Shrine.  is a location. 
You would seek Conjuration training from me? Well, then my request is small. Prove to me that you are capable of serving Molag Bal in your own way.
Summon a Faded Wraith right here, before me. When I have seen it with my own eyes, you shall be worthy of my teachings.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Traven. I am the player's guildleader in the Mages Guild. 
Hear me, and hear me well. Mannimarco will have what he seeks, but it will be his undoing at your hands.
With this gem in your possession, you will be impervious to his attempt to enthrall you. When he fails, that is when you shall strike. When we are done speaking, you will take this gem, you will then seek out Mannimarco, and destroy him. Get to him anyway you can. It is your only hope for defeating him. I have full confidence in you, and so I leave the guild in your care.
When I am gone, you will be recognized as Arch-Mage and leader of the Guild. Lead your fellow mages, and lead them well. The future rests on your shoulders.
Farewell, my friend.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Umbacano. I am a collector of Ayleid artifacts. Umbacano's house is a location. Umbacano is present in Umbacano's house. Ayleid Ruins is a location. Ayleid Ruins is ancient ruins. ancient statues is an object. 
Thank you for coming.
You may recognize that statue over there on the table. The very one that you recently sold -- for less than its true worth.
As you may know, I am somewhat of an enthusiast for Ayleid antiquities. In my own modest way, I have amassed a rather considerable collection.
I have recently become interested in obtaining the complete set of these ancient statues. I believe that ten still exist within the various ancient Ayleid Ruins. No mere shopkeeper knows their true worth.
If you bring them to me when you find them, I will pay you double for each one.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Jeanne Frasoric. I am the player's superior in the Mages Guild. Bruma Mages Guild is a location. Jeanne Frasoric is present in Bruma Mages Guild. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city.  is a location. 
A recommendation, from me? Well, of course. Raminus would naturally want my opinion, wouldn't he?
This is a situation we can both benefit from, Associate. You do me a small favor, and I'll happily send along a glowing recommendation.
J'skar's disappeared. I mean he's really disappeared. No one here has seen him in days. Volanaro thinks maybe a spell backfired. If someone from the Council were to stop by, and find him gone, it'd look bad for me. I can't have that. Talk to the mages here, and see what you can find out.
If you can make J'skar re-appear, you'll have your recommendation.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Jauffre. I am a military leader. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city.  is a location. Countess is present in Bruma. Countess is the female noble who rules Bruma. Captain Burd is present in outside the Bruma city gate. Captain Burd is the male captain of the Bruma guard. 
I've just received word from the Countess of Bruma that an Oblivion Gate has opened outside the city. It seems that the Mythic Dawn are putting their plan to attack Bruma into motion.
Since you've dealt with these Gates before, I'd like you to help the Countess's guard close this gate. Once they've seen how it's done, they should be able to handle any new gates on their own.
Captain Burd is waiting for you outside the Bruma city gate. He'll show you the Oblivion Gate. Although I doubt it will be hard to find.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Lucien Lachance. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood, giving quest via "Dead Drop Orders #3". Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a realm.  is a location. J'Ghasta's house is a location. J'Ghasta is present in J'Ghasta's house. J'Ghasta is a Khajiit nobleman, and a skilled hand to hand fighter. "Dead Drop Orders #3" is an object. "Dead Drop Orders #3" is a note. 
Dead Drop Orders #3
by Lucien Lachance

Are you ready to get your hands dirty, Silencer?
Your next target is a Khajiit nobleman by the name of J'Ghasta, who can be found at his home in the city of Bruma. J'Ghasta was recently offered the hand of a prominent Cyrodiil noble's daughter, but turned down the offer when he learned of the girl's rather negligible dowry. The girl's family is outraged, of course, and has hired the Dark Brotherhood to make J'Ghasta pay for his insolence.
Go to J'Ghasta's house in Bruma and end his miserable life. But be warned! The Khajiit is rich and bored, and spends most of his time honing his skills in unarmed combat. Any opponent who can kill with merely his hands is not to be trifled with, so tread carefully. Even worse, J'Ghasta is aware someone may be trying to kill him, and has bribed the guards not to interfere if a fight should spill out into the city streets.
When the target has been eliminated, you will find your next dead drop in a rotten box under the Old Bridge, just south of the Imperial City. The box will contain your reward for killing J'Ghasta, as well as information regarding your next contract.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Savlian Matius. I am a guard captain. Kvatch is a location. Savlian Matius is present in Kvatch. Kvatch is a location. Kvatch is a city. 
You want to help? You're kidding, right? Hmm... if you're serious, maybe I can put you to use. It'll likely mean your death, though.
I don't know how to close this Gate, but it must be possible, because the enemy closed the ones they opened during the initial attack. You can see the marks on the ground where they were, with the Great Gate right in the middle. I sent men into the Gate, to see if they could find a way to shut it. They haven't come back. If you can get in there, find out what happened to them. If they're alive, help them finish the job. If not, see what you can do on your own.
The best I can say is, good luck. If you make it back alive, we'll be waiting for you. It's a brave thing you're doing.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gray Fox. I am the player's guildleader in the Thieves Guild. Imperial City is a location. Imperial City is a large city. Earl of Imbel, Jakben is present in Imperial City. Earl of Imbel, Jakben is a man , and the last known descendant of Springheel Jak. Savilla's Stone is an object. Savilla's Stone is a stone that reveals secrets to its fielder. 
Further use of Savilla's Stone has revealed that I need another special item to move forward with my plans. I need the boots of Springheel Jak. He is a famous thief that died some 300 years ago. Legend has it that he was buried with his boots on.
Find out where Springheel Jak is buried and bring me back those boots. Will you do this for me? It pays well.
The Earl of Imbel is the only descendant of Springheel Jak's line that I have been able to locate. His name is Jakben, and he lives somewhere in the Imperial City. There might be a clue in the Earl's house.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Kud-Ei. I am the player's superior in the Mages Guild. 
I'm afraid I haven't had time to prepare anything conventional for your recommendation. I'm very preoccupied with this situation concerning Ardaline.
Perhaps you can help with that, however. I can't directly get involved, for fear of embarrassing the poor girl. Varon Vamori's been bothering Ardaline every day for a while now. He even stole her Mages' Staff! Perhaps he thinks it's amusing; I don't know. But it needs to stop. It's making her miserable.
I'll need you to have a little chat with Varon Vamori to get Ardaline's staff back, and you can learn something about the power of Illusion in the process. Take this charm scroll. With it, you should find Varon more receptive to questioning.
Don't come back without that staff. I'll write you a recommendation for your help.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Erline. I am a shocked wife. Bruma is a location. Erline is present in Bruma. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city. Carius is present in Bruma. Carius is a male criminal investigator. 
I can't believe this is happening. Please... please. I need your help. My husband was no vampire! It's ridiculous! No one will listen to me! Forgive me. I loved my husband dearly, and to lose him this way makes no sense. Anything you can do to help would be wonderful. This is all happening so fast.
I came home only just a few hours ago. I found the door open, and my Bradon dead. Standing over him was a Dunmer. I screamed and ran out into the street. Some city watch were nearby and heard me I suppose, as they arrived quickly. I heard the Dunmer identify himself as Raynil Dralas. He said he was a vampire hunter and that Bradon was his mark. The guards seemed to know about Raynil, and after a search of the house, the body of some beggar was found stashed in our basement. The guards sent for Carius, who is an investigator for crimes here in Bruma. In minutes, Raynil convinced Carius that Bradon was a vampire.
Why would he stash a body in his own house? That's ridiculous! And another thing. The guards are making a big deal out of no one seeing Bradon out in the daylight. Well of course that's the case! He works at night, and has to sleep during the day. Why does that make him a vampire? It's all that Raynil character. I don't trust him. The thing that bothers me the most is that I swear I've seen him before. Of course he says he's never been here. Look, there isn't much more to say. Please... help me clear my husband's name.
Just find Raynil Dralas, and make him tell you the truth. I swear, he's a liar!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Boethia. I am the dark warrior, one of the Daedric Princes.  is a location. Tournament of Ten Bloods is an object. Tournament of Ten Bloods is Boethia's tournament. 
Why do you summon Boethia? You are not one of my faithful.
Do you hope to be counted among my Chosen? Then prove yourself to me, mortal. I shall open a portal for you to one of my realms in Oblivion. Go, and take your place in my Tournament of Ten Bloods.
Survive, and you will be rewarded with my glorious sword Goldbrand. Fail, and your soul belongs to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Irene Metrick. I am a killer, and a master of blunt weapons. people are enemies. 
I'm Irene Metrick. If you needed to know more, you'd already know.
How many people have you killed in your lifetime, eh? Not as many as I, my little friend. When we're equals, you might interest me and get some blunt weapons training out of it.
If you've killed fifty people, it's still not enough for my tastes, but I might reconsider training you at that point.
Leave some bloody trails and tell yourself they all deserved it. Right? Ha, ha.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arch-Mage Traven. I am the player's guildleader in the Mages Guild. Arcane University is a location. Arch-Mage Traven is present in Arcane University. Arcane University is a location. Arcane University is the headquarters of the Mages Guild. Fort Teleman is a location. Fort Teleman is a fort. Irlav Jarol is present in Fort Teleman. Irlav Jarol is a male master wizard of the Mages Guild. Bloodworm Helm is an object. Bloodworm Helm is a relic of the necromancers, a helmet. 
A group of mages led by Irlav Jarol took the Bloodworm Helm, and have retreated to Fort Teleman, in an effort to study it further.
They hope to learn enough from it to find some sort of way to fight Mannimarco. I tried to dissuade them, but it was no use.
I would like the helm to be returned, so that it may be kept safe here in the Arcane University. I fear Irlav has made himself a target for the Necromancers.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martin. I am the player's friend. 
I've figured out another item needed for the ritual to open the portal to Camoran's Paradise. The second item is the counterpart to the first: the blood of a Divine.
This was a terrible puzzle to me. Unlike the Daedra, the gods have no artifacts, and do not physically manifest themselves in our world.
How then to obtain the blood of a god? But Jauffre solved it. The blood of Tiber Septim himself, who became one of the Divines. This is a secret remembered only by the Blades, passed down from one Grandmaster to the next.
Jauffre should tell it to you himself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Vicente Valtieri. I am the player's superior in the Dark Brotherhood. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city. Baenlin's house is a location. Baenlin is present in Baenlin's house. Baenlin is a male Wood Elf. Gromm is present in Baenlin's house. Gromm is Baenlin's manservant. 
We need you to stage an... accident. Kill the target in the manner specified, and you'll receive a considerable bonus. The target is a Wood Elf named Baenlin. You will find him at his home in Bruma.
Enter secretly and avoid his manservant, Gromm. On the second floor is a secreted door leading to a crawlspace. Inside are the fastenings of a mounted head that hangs over Baenlin's favorite chair. Loosen the fastenings any night between 8:00 pm and 11:00 pm, and the head will surely fall on Baenlin as he relaxes in his chair, as is custom. If Baenlin is killed in any other manner, or if the manservant Gromm is killed, you will forfeit the bonus.
Now go, and may Death be with you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Martin. I am the player's friend. Camoran's Paradise is a location. Camoran's Paradise is the hideout of the player's enemy. "Modern Heretics" is an object. "Modern Heretics" is a book. Mysterium Xarxes is an object. Mysterium Xarxes is a book of rituals. Daedric is an object. Daedric is an adjective referring to the Daedra. 
I've deciphered part of the ritual needed to open a portal to Camoran's Paradise.
The Mysterium Xarxes mentions four items needed for the ritual, but so far I have only deciphered one of them: the 'blood of a Daedra Lord'. In fact, Daedric artifacts are known to be formed from the essence of a Daedric Lord, from whence they derive their great power. Not an easy thing to come by, obviously, but we will need a Daedric artifact.
The only way to obtain a Daedric artifact is through the cults devoted to each of the Daedric Lords. The book "Modern Heretics" is the best introduction to Daedric cults. The library here has a copy if you need it.
Bring the artifact to me when you have acquired one. Remember, the Mysterium Xarxes ritual will consume the physical form of the artifact in order to release its Daedric power.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Andragil. I am a master blocker. 
You want training, from me? Well, perhaps I can accommodate you. If you're worth the time and effort, that is. I think a little test is in order.
Thinking you know how to use a shield is one thing. Actually using one is quite another. So here's what we're going to do. We're going to find out whether or not you can hold up in combat. You put up your shield, and I hit you. If you're still standing when I'm done, you've earned the right to learn what I have to teach.
Shall we find out what you really know? Now, put up your guard, and let's begin. I'm losing interest in this.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Alix Lencolia. I am a master swordsman. 
Training? From me? I'm sorry, friend, but I have no idea who you are. Never heard of you. I'm afraid I don't offer training to just anyone. If you were famous, perhaps... or infamous, I suppose... that might count for something. But, alas, you're not.
Until I hear your name spoken by others, don't expect any training from me. When you're known as a hero or a villain, I might change my mind.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Thorley Aethelred. I am a farmer. Shardrock is a location. Thorley Aethelred is present in Shardrock. Shardrock is a location. Shardrock is Thorley Aethelred's farm. West Weald Bears are bears. West Weald Bears are enemies. 
It seems I'm having a bear problem and I just don't know what to do.
I've had attacks on my small flock of sheep lately. I was hoping that building a fence would solve the problem, but it hasn't helped at all. Then, one day when I was just about to step outside, I saw the culprits. A group of West Weald Bears was dragging away a sheep carcass. There's no way I can fight those ferocious beasts off on my own.
If you could thin the population a bit, they would probably leave the area. Kill six of the things, bring me their fangs as proof, and I'll reward you well.
Please, you're my only hope.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Casta Scribonia. I am a female writer, and the author of 'Woman Gone Wild'. Grey Mare is a location. Grey Mare is a tavern. 'Woman Gone Wild' is an object. 'Woman Gone Wild' is a book. 
Hello. I'm Casta Scribonia. The writer. Author of 'Woman Gone Wild'.
Who is the fairest of them all? Other than myself? Emfrid, the proprietor of the Grey Mare is lovely. She and Bittneld the Curse-Bringer, the guard captain would be a nice couple....
Perhaps you could bring them together somehow... try talking to them both about each other?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Rusia. I am a well-traveled woman. County Anvil is a location. County Anvil is a county. 
I'm Rusia. My husband is General Silgor Bradus, one of County Anvil's commanders in the field.
I did quite a bit of traveling. Back before I met Silgor, and decided to settle down. It's all about pacing yourself. You should get out there, and experience things for yourself. Discover new places, travel to lands you've never seen.
Maybe once you've done that, we can talk about how to better pace yourself. I'll teach you what I know about athletics. Maybe we can swap stories about life on the road, too.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Azura. I am the queen of dawn and dusk, one of the Daedric Princes. Gutted Mine is a location. Gutted Mine is a vampire lair. 
Greetings, traveler. I am Azura, known as the Queen of Dawn and Dusk.
I have seen your name, traveler, and heard it whispered in twilight. I ask a service, which holds promise of fame and reward.
Many years ago, five followers of mine slew the vampire Dratik and its kin, but all were infected by the foul creature. Knowing their fate, they sealed themselves up in the vampire's lair. Their suffering weighs heavily on me. Five bright candles shall burn forever in memory of their sacrifice.
Travel to the Gutted Mine. The door will open to you. Bring the peace of death to my followers, and you shall earn my gratitude. For your service, you shall have my Star, that your deeds might be entered in the Book of Fate.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gin-Wulm. I am a blacksmith. First Edition is a location. First Edition is a bookstore. 
Mighty bold of you, asking for smithing training. What makes you think you're worth my time?
I bet you don't know the first thing about smithing. Have you read up on the history of the craft? I doubt it. You answer a simple question, and I'll think about training you.
So here it is: What does the name Hazadir mean to you? Few recognize the name anymore, even though he was famous.
Had a book written about him, in fact! I don't have a copy myself, but there was one in First Edition last time I was browsing there. At least some people take an interest in history.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Gray Fox. I am the player's guildmaster in the Thieves Guild. Malintus' house is a location. Gray Fox is present in Malintus' house. Bravil is a location. Bravil is a city. Fathis Aren is present in Bravil. Fathis Aren is a powerful male court wizard. Malintus is present in Malintus' house. Malintus is a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Savilla's Stone is an object. Savilla's Stone is a stone that reveals secrets to its fielder. Arrow of Extrication is an object. Arrow of Extrication is a small, unique item. 
My work with Savilla's Stone has revealed that I need something special for my plans. It's a small item in the possession of a powerful court wizard. Will you do this for me? I will pay you well.
Bring me the Arrow of Extrication. It has a key shaped head. Bravil's court wizard, Fathis Aren, recently acquired this unique item. You may kill Fathis if necessary, but not in the castle. My spy network will tell me when you have it. Return here with the arrow when you do.
The beggars in Bravil will surely know where Aren keeps the Arrow. Now we should get out of Malintus' house before we wear out our welcome.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Modryn Oreyn. I am the player's superior in the Fighters Guild. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city.  is a location. Arpenia is a location. Arpenia is Azani Blackheart's stronghold. 
Good. You're here. We've got duties to attend to.
I've been looking into the Blackwood Company. Heard some disturbing things. We know they're a danger to us. And we know they're good at what they do.
I've heard stories, but nothing I can prove is true. Maybe they've got a mage working with them. Maybe they're just well trained. All I know for sure is that they'll accept any contract, and they'll do anything to complete it. And they don't care who gets in the way.
We were contracted by a wizard, Argoth, to recover an artifact from Azani Blackheart, a ruthless bandit leader. I went in there with twenty men. I left with five. Vitellus Donton wasn't one of them. He died covering our retreat. I snooped around. Apparently, the Blackwood Company completed that contract for us. I went in there with twenty good men. I can't believe that bunch finished the job. There's more. Argoth -- he's dead, the artifact gone. Sounds like a set-up. Maybe they made a deal with Blackheart. I don't know. But I'll find out.
Now we find out what really happened. And we let it be known. I want to show the people who the Blackwood Company really are. I can't order you do this with me. It's dangerous, and Vilena Donton isn't going to know about it. It's your choice.
If you accept this mission, we leave as soon as you're ready. I want to investigate Blackheart's stronghold at Arpenia. Meet me at the Leyawiin guild hall. We'll go from there.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Burz gro-Khash. I am the player's rude superior in the Fighters Guild. Water's Edge is a location. Water's Edge is a settlement. 
I've got another contract for you, meat. I assume you won't embarrass yourself.
It's from Biene Amelion at the Water's Edge settlement. She needs something retrieved from her ancestral tomb. You'll find her at the Water's Edge settlement. It's marked on your map.
Try not to muck it up.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Tooth-in-the-Sea. I am a master of Alteration.  is a location. 
Would you learn from me? Then meet me during the day, out under the waves in the bay.
If you wish to learn what I know about Alteration, then you must stay there with me for a full three hours. How you manage to do this is up to you; do not wander off, or I shall consider this test of your ability failed.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Arch-Mage Traven. I am the player's guildmaster in the Mages Guild. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Silorn is a location. Silorn is ruins in the south of Cyrodiil. 
Time is against us, and our enemies grow stronger. There is much to do, and little time in which to do it. Your next task is essential.
Word has been sent that the Necromancers have been quite busy, creating black soul gems for their master. In particular, a unique Black Soul Gem has been crafted in the south of Cyrodiil, in the ruins of Silorn.
This gem needs to be confiscated and brought here, before it can be delivered to the King of Worms and used against us. I have need of it. I believe the Black Soul Gem  may be instrumental in saving our guild. I will explain once you have returned with it. Until then, discussion is useless.
A contingent of Battlemages has been sent to the site. I would like you to oversee their actions on my behalf. The only thing that matters is that gem. Do you understand? Once you have it safely in your possession, return here immediately.
Know that you have my complete confidence. I would not entrust this job to you if I did not feel you were prepared for it. Now, go.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Carahil. I am the leader of one of the guild halls of Mages Guild. Brina Cross Inn is a location. Brina Cross Inn is an inn north of here. Arielle Jurard is present in Brina Cross Inn. Arielle Jurard is a female mage. 
So you are here for your recommendation? Unlike some frivolous tasks you may be given at other guild halls, this is a serious matter, and has consequences. Are you prepared?
Allow me to explain the task. The Council of Mages has entrusted me with resolving a situation along the Gold Road. Several traveling merchants have been found dead along the Gold Road recently, with even more missing. The Council has asked that I put a stop to it. You are going to help me do so.
As you are new to the guild, you are less likely to be recognized as a member. This may give you an advantage in getting to the root of the problem. We believe the killings are the actions of a rogue mage. Battlemages have been sent to the Brina Cross Inn, the only common link between the victims.
You are to travel north to the Brina Cross Inn, and speak with Arielle Jurard. She will give you further instructions.
This is a harsh, dangerous task for you, I realize. Your unfamiliar face makes you most useful, however. And, what better way to learn the many uses of Restoration? Practical application is often the best educator. Even in life and death situations.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Sinderion. I am a wine enthusiast, and a master alchemist. Tamika's is a location. Tamika's is a vineyard in Skingrad. Surilie Brothers is a location. Surilie Brothers is a vineyard in Skingrad. Skingrad is a location. Skingrad is a city. 399 is an object. 399 is a great vintage. 
Training? Oh, I'm afraid that's not my area of expertise. I'm very focused on wines right now, you see.
Wonderful thing, wine. It's all about the balance. The flavor, the bouquet, the consistency... just wonderful. I'm sorry, what? Training... right. I'll make you a deal: you fetch me a bottle of each of the best wines from Skingrad, and I'll think about it.
Both vineyards, Tamika's and Surilie Brothers. Vintage 399. Oh, what a good year that was...

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Jauffre. I am a military leader. Bruma is a location. Bruma is a city in Cyrodiil. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. 
Good work. Captain Burd and his guardsmen should be able to handle any additional Gates, at least for now. But the Bruma Guard cannot defend the city indefinitely. The Daedra of Oblivion are innumerable; the guardsmen of Bruma are not.
We need to gather what allies we can before Bruma is hopelessly besieged. If the Mythic Dawn manages to open a Great Gate here, the city will need a stronger garrison for there to be any hope of defending it.
You should speak to the rulers of the other cities of Cyrodiil, as well as the Elder Council. Ask them to send aid to Bruma before it is too late.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Raminus Polus. I am the player's underling in the Mages Guild. Lustratorium is a location. Lustratorium is the alchemical center of the university of mages. Julienne Fanis is present in Lustratorium. Julienne Fanis is a female alchemist in the Mages Guild. 
As the Arch-Mage, you are entitled to certain privileges.
In addition to the full use of all Guild facilities, there is one service available to you. Julienne Fanis has long served Arch-Mage Traven in collecting alchemical ingredients for his personal research. As the new Arch-Mage, I'm sure she'll extend the service to you as well.
At your convenience, consult her at the Lustratorium.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am Ganredhel. I am an advanced acrobatics trainer, who trains dogs and prefers them to people. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province. Aerin's Camp is a location. Aerin's Camp is a camp located in the mountains in the north of Cyrodiil. Aerin is present in Aerin's Camp. Aerin is a female master acrobat. 
Ganredhel. I train dogs. And people.
Prefer dogs. People, I teach them advanced acrobatics. Up and jump. Dogs, I teach them to bite people.
If you require further training, you might consider venturing into the mountains in the north of Cyrodiil. Aerin's Camp, specifically.
Aerin's a very gifted acrobat, and could teach you anything you needed to know.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion
 I am S'Krivva. I am the player's new Doyen in the Thieves Guild. Leyawiin is a location. Leyawiin is a city. Ahdarji is present in Leyawiin. Ahdarji is the widow of a former fence. 
I have a special request from the widow of a former fence in Leyawiin. As your new Doyen, I am asking you to help her.
A street scavenger made off with a ring that the widow Ahdarji values highly. She is offering a reward. The guild frowns on freelance thieves.
Go to Leyawiin. Speak with Ahdarji and help her find her ring.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 gold is an object. 
Are you interested in my services? I warn you, my skills do not come cheaply.
Hmm, I suppose I can work with your face. After all, the sculptor cannot always choose the finest clay.
Shall I remake your face?  It is no small thing to submit yourself to the flesh sculptor's knife. Just give me 1,000 gold and tell me what you desire - beauty or hideous deformity, nothing is beyond my skill.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Fura Bloodmouth. I am a fellow vampire. 
A feral-blooded has holed up with a group of bandits. Likely wants to create a nest of broodlings.
We don't need competition for blood, and we don't want the mortals getting up in arms making things difficult for us. Go destroy the feral beast before this becomes a problem.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dexion Evicus. I am a moth priest. Ancestor Glades is a location. Ancestor Glades is secluded locations scattered across Tamriel. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province on Tamriel.  is a location. "Blood" is an object. "Blood" is an Elder Scroll which foreshadows the defiance of the gods with the blood of mortals. Elder Scrolls is an object. Elder Scrolls is mysterious scrolls which are fragments of creation from outside time and space. 
Scattered across Tamriel are secluded locations known only as Ancestor Glades. There's one in Skyrim, in the Pine Forest.
Performing the Ritual of the Ancestor Moth within the glade should provide the answers you seek. It involves carefully removing the bark from a Canticle Tree which will in turn attract Ancestor Moths to you.
In keeping with tradition, you must use a specific tool in the Ancestor Glade, an implement known as a Draw Knife. Every Moth Priest is taught this ritual, but few ever get the chance to perform it... you should consider yourself fortunate if it works for you.
Once enough of the moths are following, they'll provide you with the second sight needed to decipher the Elder Scrolls. From what I saw in the vision, the Elder Scroll which foreshadows the defiance of the gods with the blood of mortals is the key to the prophecy.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Serana. I am a woman. Cyrodiil is a location. Cyrodiil is a province half a continent away from the player and Serana. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. Elder Scrolls is an object. Elder Scrolls is mysterious scrolls used in divining prophecies. 
So, in case you didn't notice the giant thing on my back, I have an Elder Scroll with me. Whatever it says, it will have something that can help us stop my father. But of course, neither of us can read it.
The Moth Priests are the only ones I've heard of who can do it. They spend years preparing before they start reading, though. Not that it helps us anyway, because they're all half a continent away in Cyrodiil.
The College of Winterhold was the first place I'd think to go for any kind of magic or historical thing. The wizards there know about all kinds of things that people probably shouldn't know about.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Florentius Baenius. I am an eccentric follower of Arkay. Morvunskar is a location. Morvunskar is a necromancer lair. Farkas is present in Morvunskar. Farkas is a man, and the player's friend. 
Arkay has some grave news, friend. Your friend, Farkas, kidnapped! A vicious night stalker rules over a group of necromancers - seeks to gain leverage over the righteous.
Arkay's never clear on life and death. Is he still alive? There's always hope... Go to Morvunskar, kill the vampire, and try to save Farkas.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Lord Harkon. I am the player's vampire sire. Skyrim is a location. Lord Harkon is present in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. Moth Priest is present in Skyrim. Moth Priest is a priest who has dedicated his whole life to reading and deciphering Elder Scrolls. Elder Scrolls is an object. Elder Scrolls is mysterious scrolls used in divining prophecies. 
Scions of the night! Hear my words! The prophesied time is at last upon us. Soon we will claim dominion over the sun itself, and forge a new realm of eternal darkness.
Now that I have reclaimed one of my Elder Scrolls, we must find a Moth Priest to read it. I have spread false rumors about the discovery of an Elder Scroll in Skyrim to lure a Moth Priest here. Now it is time to see if those efforts have borne fruit.
Go forth, and search the land for rumors of a Moth Priest within our borders. Look to the cities. Speak to innkeepers, carriage drivers, anyone who would meet a traveler.
Go now, and carry out this task. This is my command!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Soul Cairn is a location. Soul Cairn is a terrible dimension where souls are trapped for an eternity. Arvak is present in Soul Cairn. Arvak is a male horse, belongs to the soul. 
You must help me find my Arvak. He doesn't deserve to be in a place like this!
Arvak is my horse. We came to this horrible place together. We were attacked by monsters, so I told him to run.
Please, he's such a loyal creature, and he's been running for so long. You have to save him! A place like this will change you...
If you find him, I'll teach you how to call him to you. I'm sure he'd be much happier someplace sunnier.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Gunmar. I am a fellow vampire hunter. Treva's Watch is a location. Treva's Watch is a fort. 
I've found another beast hiding from the light of day.
We need to destroy him before he turns his comrades into a brood of vampires. He's holed up in Treva's Watch with a group of a bandits.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vingalmo. I am a fellow vampire, who speaks elegantly. Riften is a location. Riften is a city in the south. Valindor is present in Riften. Valindor is a knowledgeable man. 
I've found a new candidate, ripe for the Gift. I'm sending you to welcome this soul into our family.
Valindor of Riften has his ears in places that we'd love to listening in. Joining our family should increase our possibilities in the south.
Put his mind to rest, allay his fear through vampiric seduction and when he is in a pliant condition, embrace him and bite him on the neck.
When you offer the embrace, do so away from prying eyes. Our new sibling will then likely require rest while his blood undergoes the change. Return to me when your part is done.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Florentius Baenius. I am a follower of Arkay and a fellow Dawnguard member. Fort Dawnguard is a location. Florentius Baenius is present in Fort Dawnguard. Sightless Pit is a location. Sightless Pit is a Falmer lair. 
I've been pouring over some of the tomes left here in the keep. Interesting stories, indeed. Seems the previous incarnation of the Dawnguard had, at one time, some interesting toys.
I have located one of their toys. Arkay and I think it could be a great advantage for us. You should look into retrieving it. It is a magical shield that when blocked with, surrounds its wielder with a holy aura that harms the undead. Might come in handy.
You'll be up against the Falmer of Sightless Pit, if I understand Arkay correctly. Nothing you can't handle.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Isran. I am the player's leader in the Dawnguard. Reach, trying to find dwarven ruins is a location. Sorine Jurard is present in Reach, trying to find dwarven ruins. Sorine Jurard is a smart Breton girl, who is good with tinkering and fascinated with the Dwemer and their weapons. Elder Scroll is an object. Elder Scroll is a powerful piece of creation. 
We're up against powerful vampires, unlike anything we've seen before. And they have an Elder Scroll.
There are people I've met and worked with over the years. We need their skills, their talents, if we're going to survive this.
I think we'll want Sorine Jurard. Breton girl, whip-smart and good with tinkering. Fascination with the Dwemer. Weapons in particular. Last I knew, she was out in the Reach, convinced she was about to find the biggest dwarven ruins yet. You'll also want to find Gunmar. Big brute of a Nord, hates vampires almost as much as I do. Got it into his head years back that his experience with animals would help. Trolls in particular, from what I hear.
If you can find them, we might have a chance.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Isran. I am the player's leader in the Dawnguard. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. 
Jarl Brunwulf Free-Winter is in danger. A vampire plays as a visiting "advisor" to the court of Windhelm. Destroy it before it's able to complete its foul business.
But be warned. The Jarl's guards are unaware of the threat, and will treat violence against this "advisor" as a crime. Convince the Jarl of the threat and he'll let you destroy the creature. If not, then do your best not to get caught.
Quickly now! The longer you delay, the more danger the Jarl is in.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Katria. I am a ghost of an adventurer. ancient ruins is a location. Katria is present in ancient ruins.  is a location. "The Aetherium Wars" is an object. "The Aetherium Wars" is a book written by Katria's male apprentice, contains Katria's research on the Aetherium Forge. Aetherium Forge is an object. Aetherium Forge is a mythic forge. 
The name's Katria. I am - was - an adventurer. Raided ruins like this for nigh on twenty years. I was on the trail of something big. It led me here, and... I didn't make it.
Oh. You read the book, didn't you? "The Aetherium Wars"? It was my theory, you know. My research. My life's work. All of it, lost! Stolen by my own damn apprentice! That's how I ended up here. I can't rest. Not until I find the Aetherium Forge, until I can prove that it was my discovery. Mine, not his!
Hmm... well, you can pick up where I left off. My notes should still be in my journal, if you can read it. We still have to find the Forge itself. I had a lead on that, too.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Jiub the Eradicator, Saint Jiub, Jiub. I am a ghost of a man who wants people to know of his achievements in life. Soul Cairn is a location. Jiub the Eradicator, Saint Jiub, Jiub is present in Soul Cairn. Soul Cairn is a location. Soul Cairn is a terrible realm of souls. 
I am Jiub. Some call me Saint Jiub. Others call me Jiub the Eradicator. Perhaps you've heard of me?
If you haven't, I can't say that I am surprised. Until I get my second volume published, no one will ever know of my achievements. In order to write the second volume of my opus, I need the notes from my first volume. Otherwise I need to do all of this from memory.
When I was tossed in here I felt myself falling and I dropped the pages I had been holding. There were ten of them in all.
Find them for me, please, I beg you!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Gunmar. I am a fellow Dawnguard member. 
I've learned of a possible vampire.
And while I do not know its exact whereabouts, I do have information suggesting someone who does.
Pay a visit to the beast's last known contact. Do what you must to find where it's hiding now.
Then root out the monster, and destroy it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Isran. I am the player's leader in the Dawnguard. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. Castle Volkihar is a location. Castle Volkihar is a castle belonging to Harkon in Tamriel. Harkon is present in Castle Volkihar. Harkon is the lord of the vampires. 
The day hasn't been won while the vampire Harkon still walks Tamriel.
Let me address the Dawnguard, and then we'll be off. The men deserve to know that we've finally gained the upper hand. It's time we take the fight to their door.
Gather your things and rest well, my friend. We meet outside Castle Volkihar.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Serana. I am a woman. 
I think we both know... it's time to face my father Harkon. If we don't, he'll keep chasing us for the rest of our lives.
Well, before we spoke to my mother in the Soul Cairn, I would have said we bring the bow to my father. But after everything with her... I don't think we can trust him. No. He has to die. We have no choice.
Let's face him together.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Fura Bloodmouth. I am a fellow vampire. 
You're going to go kill a Dawnguard spy.
But don't draw attention. Some kills are for fun, some for profit. And others are for sending messages. This one is a message. Don't make a big scene. Don't get caught.
The corpse is to be the message, not the attack. With any luck he'll bleed to death before anyone notices. A cold corpse will say what we want better than a warm one.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Garan Marethi. I am a fellow vampire, who speaks elegantly. 
I've learned the whereabouts of a troublesome Dawnguard member. You will track him down and dispose of him.
But please, do be discreet. Don't. Get. Caught. Our aim isn't to stir the nest, just to skin a rat, reminding them that they are the prey.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Gunmar. I am a fellow Dawnguard member. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. 
I've located the whereabouts of a vampire masquerading as a common citizen in Solitude. Track him down and dispose of him.
Vampires enjoy stalking their prey. Passing among us undetected emboldens them. Makes them feel powerful, untouchable. But we'll put a swift end to that.
Tread lightly. The vampire can cloud the minds of those he preys upon. It won't be easy to convince anyone he's other than he appears. The law is unaware of the danger and will treat you as a criminal if you are caught. You must be clever. Find a way not to be caught or accused of murder.
We must be vigilant and self sufficient if we are to defeat these monsters.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vingalmo. I am a fellow vampire, who speaks elegantly. 
It's come to my inescapable attention that you, my dear friend, are married. Marriage is a fine institution, however, one that does present certain difficulties for such as like ourselves.
May I strongly suggest that you make a visit to this spouse of yours and "invite" her to the family by offering her the Gift of Vampirism. Put her mind to rest, allay her fear through vampiric seduction and when she is in a pliant condition, embrace her and bite her on the neck.
It is the greatest token we can bestow upon those we love and wish to see protected.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Durnehviir. I am a dragon, and a reluctant servant of the Ideal Masters. Soul Cairn is a location. Durnehviir is present in Soul Cairn. Soul Cairn is a location. Soul Cairn is a terrible dimension that imprisons souls. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. 
My desire to speak with you was born from the result of our battle. I merely wish to respectfully ask a favor of you.
For countless years I've roamed the Soul Cairn, in unintended service to the Ideal Masters. Before this, I roamed the skies above Tamriel. I desire to return there.
I fear that my time here has taken its toll upon me. I share a bond with this dreaded place. If I ventured far from the Soul Cairn, my strength would begin to wane until I was no more.
I will place my name with you and grant you the right to call my name from Tamriel. Do me this simple honor and I will fight at your side as your Grah-Zeymahzin, your Ally, and teach you my Thu'um.
Simply speak my name to the heavens when you feel the time is right.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Urag gro-Shub. I am a tough librarian. Skyrim is a location. Urag gro-Shub is present in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. 
Well, well. I haven't seen one of these beauties in a long time. A rare find in the original Falmer language. You're damn right I'm interested. Question is, are you selling?
Well, considering no one else in Skyrim would buy something they couldn't possibly read, I'd say you don't have much of a choice. Tell you what, you bring me books like this, and I'll pay a thousand gold each. I'll even throw in a translated edition I have for free.
If you're holding out for more gold, it's never going to happen.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Fura Bloodmouth. I am a fellow vampire.  is a location. Auriel's Bow is an object. Auriel's Bow is a divine artifact. 
The Dawnguard will, no doubt, soon become even more of a nuisance now that Auriel's Bow has been recovered.
We need to strike a crippling blow against them before they muster more men against us. They've holed up in an abandoned fort in the Reach. The Dawnguard are apparently focused on exterminating vampires, noble and brute alike. Not a serious threat, but we can't leave them completely unchecked or they may become one.
But their time has come to an end. And you will be the one that ends it. Killing their leaders should discourage them from an out and out war with us.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Melka. I am a patronizing Hagraven.  is a location. 
Who enters? Will nobody save poor Melka?
You, meat! Come, come. Don't leave poor Melka to die. Pretty, pretty flesh. Let me out!
Petra! Evil Petra put me in a cage, stole my tower. Hate her, chew her bones! Let me out, kind, kind meat.
Ah, I have a pretty staff. Help me find Petra, wring her neck, pluck her eyes. Take my prize staff, I just want my tower back!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Feran Sadri. I am a fellow vampire. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. 
The Dawnguard have increased their operations and have been aggressively recruiting in Whiterun.
We need to put a damper on their efforts and give those trouble makers something to worry about other than harassing our interests.
You are to make a public show of murdering someone. Do it in the streets for all to see. The higher the profile the better. Someone attached to the court, a merchant, a bard, a priest, someone with stature. Make it seem you are a member of the Dawnguard, thus sowing confusion among the herd. Wear this armor and plant this note on the victim.
The people will put pressure on the Dawnguard who are apparently murdering their fellows without provocation. Their focus will be shifted from us, giving us one less nuisance to deal with.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delphine. I am a paranoid woman. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Esbern is present in Riften. Esbern is a paranoid man. Brynjolf is present in Riften. Brynjolf is a 'well-connected' man. 
We've got to find Esbern in Riften before the Thalmor do. He'll know how to stop the dragons if anybody does. You'd better get to Riften. Talk to Brynjolf. He's... well-connected. A good starting point at least.
Oh, and when you find Esbern... if you think I'm paranoid... you may have some trouble getting him to trust you. Just ask him where he was on the 30th of Frostfall. He'll know what it means.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Edla. I am a slightly worried mother. Skaal Village is a location. Edla is present in Skaal Village. Skaal Village is a location. Skaal Village is a small, remote village. Nikulas is present in Skaal Village. Nikulas is Edla's son, strong and loyal, yet reckless and foolish. 
I'm Edla. I have a son. His name is Nikulas. He's a good lad, strong and loyal. I only wish he wasn't so eager to leave the village. I've tried to tell him that the world beyond our lands is dangerous and cruel, but he won't listen.
For now, I need Nikulas here. You see, his father, my husband, was recently lost to us. Nikulas is all that I have left in this world. I know it is selfish of me to say so, but I cannot lose him. Not while I still grieve. Also, I know his heart. Nikulas is reckless and foolish, like most young men. He cannot understand what awaits him in the wide world.
Could you talk to Nikulas? I know he would listen to you. You've been out there in the wide world. You know its perils.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Durak. I am a member of the Dawnguard. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Fort Dawnguard is a location. Fort Dawnguard is a fort southeast of Riften. Isran is present in Fort Dawnguard. Isran is the male leader of the Dawnguard. 
I'm Durak of the Dawnguard.
We are vampire hunters. We search out and destroy those bloodsucking scum wherever we find them. We are looking for anyone willing to fight against the growing vampire menace.
Everybody says that they are not interested about joining, right up until they find their throat being ripped out by a pack of hungry vampires.
Want to sign up to the Dawnguard and kill vampires? Go talk to Isran, our leader, at Fort Dawnguard, southeast of Riften. He'll decide if you're Dawnguard material.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brelyna Maryon. I am a fellow mage student. 
We're all trying to become better mages, right?
Well, I need someone I can practice a few spells on. Nothing dangerous, really.
Would you be willing to assist me? I can't practice that kind of spell on myself. Believe me when I say I wouldn't be asking if it weren't necessary. You just have to stand there...
You might wish to help out one of your fellow mages. If that is not enough, I have this amulet you could take.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Galmar Stone-Fist. I am the player's commanding officer in the Stormcloaks. Morthal is a location. Morthal is a town. Dragon Bridge is a location. Dragon Bridge is a town. Rorikstead is a location. Rorikstead is a town.  is a location. 
I Need you to deliver some false orders to the Imperial Legate in Morthal. But first we need to get our hands on some Imperial orders to make the forgeries.
The inns at Dragon Bridge and Rorikstead are frequent stops for Imperial runners. See if you can't "convince" one of those innkeepers to help you. One way or another, get me those documents.
Talos guide you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Arngeir. I am the player's ally. Dragonsreach is a location. Dragonsreach is the palace of the Jarl of Whiterun that was built to hold a captive dragon. Jarl of Whiterun is present in Dragonsreach. Jarl of Whiterun is a headstrong noblemen. 
Do you know Dragonsreach? The Jarl of Whiterun's palace? Its name is no accident. The palace was originally built to hold a captive dragon.
You might be able to trap a dragon there, interrogate him and learn Alduin's location. You'd require the Jarl's cooperation, of course. That might not be easy to come by.
You must trust in the rightness of your cause, and the strength of your Voice.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Legate Rikke. I am the player's commanding officer in the Imperial Legion. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a town. Nightgate or Candlehearth is a location. Nightgate or Candlehearth is inns, frequent stops for Stormcloak runners. 
I need you to deliver some false orders to the Stormcloak commander in Dawnstar. But first we need to get our hands on some rebel orders to make the forgeries.
The Nightgate and Candlehearth inns are frequent stops for Stormcloak runners. See if you can't "convince" one of those innkeepers to help you. One way or another, get me those documents.
Show the rebels the futility of their cause.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Feran Sadri. I am a fellow vampire. Swindler's Den is a location. Swindler's Den is a bandit cave. Cragwallow Slope is a location. Cragwallow Slope is a cave. 
I've discovered the whereabouts of a set of ancient rings of Blood Magic: the Ring of the Erudite in Swindler's Den and the Ring of the Beast in Cragwallow Slope. They belong among our kind, not gathering mold in some vagabond's treasure pile.
The rings increase the abilities of your vampiric powers. Some say Molag Bal himself gave these rings to ancient powerful vampire lords. Some say that is just a myth.
You'll be able to keep the rings. I wouldn't be telling you where to find them if I desired them for myself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tolfdir. I am the player's teacher at the College of Winterhold. outside the College of Winterhold is a location. Tolfdir is present in outside the College of Winterhold. Labyrinthian is a location. Labyrinthian is an ancient ruin. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a school of mages. Ancano is present in College of Winterhold. Ancano is a power-hungry male wizard. Eye of Magnus is an object. Eye of Magnus is a dangerous, powerful artifact. Staff of Magnus is an object. Staff of Magnus is a powerful staff that can breach magical shields according to the Psijics. 
Ancano has sealed himself inside the College! The Eye of Magnus is is growing his power. We can't crack whatever magic he's using to shield himself.
I hope your trip to Labyrinthian was worth it. You have the Staff of Magnus, then? Let's hope it's as powerful as the Psijics believe it to be.
You're the one with the staff, my child. If it can help us get inside the College, and reach Ancano, we'll have to hope that there's a way to stop all this.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sondas Drenim. I am a man. Darkwater Crossing is a location. Sondas Drenim is present in Darkwater Crossing. Darkwater Crossing is a location. Darkwater Crossing is a village. Darkwater Pass is a location. Darkwater Pass is a dangerous cave filled with water pools and high falls, south of Darkwater Crossing. Derkeethus is present in Darkwater Pass. Derkeethus is a man, Sondas Drenim's friend. 
There's a cave known as the Darkwater Pass south of here. It has its share of water pools and high falls.
Those falls... dangerous place. A friend of mine, Derkeethus, thought he could find some good fish in the pools. Haven't heard from him in a long while.
Could you try to find him? He might need someone to rescue him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard. 
You could help me with my research. I believe I've discovered a new form of silence. Some philosophers postulate seven orders of silence, but I believe there's an eighth.
If you allow me, I'd like to envelop you in the eighth form, to study the mental effects. If this works, I'll prepare a version that you can cast yourself, if you ever wish to inflict... er, study silence.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard. 
You want to help with my research? Are you willing to be an experimental subject?
Oh, it's nothing too dangerous. The experiment should provide an additional spectral tether from your own lifespark to the divine realm. You would experience it as a sort of... increased vigor. You would fight longer, feel stronger, that sort of thing. At least I think it will. Probably. Almost certainly. Of course, you never can tell.
Now stand still... it's my first time casting this spell, and I don't need any additional distractions.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Valdar. I am a ghostly guardian whose powers are fading. tomb of Hevnoraak is a location. Valdar is present in tomb of Hevnoraak.  is a location. Hevnoraak is present in tomb of Hevnoraak. Hevnoraak is an evil man who has been dead for many generations. 
Leave, stranger. Evil stirs in this place. I fear for the security of the very land if it should break free.
We stand at the tomb of Hevnoraak, who has been dead for many generations. I fear, however, that his return may be at hand. I have been holding him here. While he regains strength, however, I am fading. By now I can barely contain his power, much less defeat him if he awakens. But with the help of a living champion I may be able to succeed.
Three vessels in the tomb below hold the power to vanquish Hevnoraak. Before anything else, we need those. Bring them to me - but be careful, mortal. They are guarded by Hevnoraak's minions. They will stop at nothing to see their master return.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Erik. I am a young man. Rorikstead is a location. Erik is present in Rorikstead. Rorikstead is a location. Rorikstead is a village. Mralki is present in Rorikstead. Mralki is Erik's father, an innkeeper in Rorikstead. 
You look like you've seen your share of adventure. I envy you that. In fact, maybe you can help me with something.
I want to be an adventurer like you, but my father says I can't. He says that he needs me to stay here and work the farm, and even if he did let me be an adventurer, we couldn't afford to buy armor. His name's Mralki, and he's the innkeeper here. I hope you can change my father's mind. He can be a little stubborn.
I can't stand the thought of being trapped in this village for the rest of my days.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Skjor. I am the player's superior in the Companions. Pale is a location. Pale is a cold province. 
You're looking for work? It seems that law-breakers in the Pale have no desire to stay there. I don't blame them.
One of them's escaped, and you're going to find that coward. At this point they don't care what happens to him and neither do I. Best to just kill him and be done with it.
Be careful. This man is known to be dangerous.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farengar Secret-Fire. I am an enchanter. 
Ah, a student of the craft. You'll need to start by learning an enchantment.
Take an enchanted weapon or piece of armor, then use the Arcane Enchanter to learn its secrets. The item is destroyed in the process, so be wary. Once you know an enchantment, you'll need a filled soul gem, and something to enchant. You'll use the Arcane Enchanter for that, too.
Of course I have everything you need for sale, if you have the coin.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sergius Turrianus. I am an enchanter at the College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. Sergius Turrianus is present in College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a school of mages. 
There's more enchanting to be done. You can acquire whatever it is and bring it back here, and I'll take care of it.
Be quick about it, will you? This is a good way for the College to bring in some money.
Here's the name and location of the client.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Elmus. I am a brewer from Thirsk Mead Hall. a miserable place is a location. Elmus is present in a miserable place. Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Thirsk Mead Hall is a mead hall. Ashfire Mead is an object. Ashfire Mead is a special brew made at Thirsk Mead Hall. 
Actually, now that I think of it, I have been missing the Ashfire Mead. It's a special brew that we make at Thirsk.
If you could... somehow... get up there and grab a bottle, I'd be a long way towards forgetting how miserable it is down here.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Elisif the Fair. I am a noblewoman.  is a location. 
There's something... personal... I was hoping you would do for me.
As you may know Talos worship is outlawed in the Empire. When we buried my husband I made offerings to all the gods... except Talos. My husband Torygg would want a proper burial.
I would like you to take an item of his, a war horn handed down from his father, and place it at a Shrine of Talos.
It would mean a lot to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Elmus. I am a brewer. Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Elmus is present in Thirsk Mead Hall. Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Thirsk Mead Hall is a mead hall on Solstheim. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is a remote island. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. 
We lost most of the mead batches we had brewing when... before those things were here. One is just ready to take its turn, though, and it's about time to add some of the flavorings.
You can't find them on Solstheim, but if you find yourself back in Skyrim, I wouldn't mind you bringing some juniper berries.
They add a different kind of sweetness. Tart. Makes the flavor more round.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ebony Warrior. I am a man who has done all that can be done. the Ebony Warrior's last vigil is a location. Ebony Warrior is present in the Ebony Warrior's last vigil. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the afterlife of heroes.  is a location. 
I am the Ebony Warrior. I have come to challenge you to a fight.
I have done all that can be done. There is nothing left. No quests to be undertaken. No villains to be slain. No challenges to face.
Except for you. You are my last challenge. Only you can send me to Sovngarde with honor.
Make your preparations. When you are ready, come find me at my last vigil.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Esbern. I am a wise man. Skyrim is a location. Esbern is present in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a school for mages in Skyrim. Elder Scroll is an object. Elder Scroll is a scroll that can show the player the past. 
Ah, you need an Elder Scroll. There's a pretty puzzle. Not the kind of thing you'll find in your local bookshop. Let me think...
Perhaps the College of Winterhold. What learning there is in Skyrim is gathered there. One of the mages there may be able to put you on the trail of this Elder Scroll.
This Elder Scroll might be able to show you the past in some way, and let you learn the Dragonrend shout.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Igmund. I am the nobleman who rules over Markarth. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Hag's End is a location. Hag's End is a den of Hagravens. 
I do have more work for you. A personal matter. My father died trying to negotiate with the Forsworn, back when that was possible.
They took his shield to Hag's End, to those Hagraven beasts they consort with. I need you to bring it home where it belongs. I warn you, it's dangerous work. No man of mine has ever faced a Hagraven and lived. I'll understand if you decline.
Return my father's shield to me and I'll grant you permission to purchase property in my city.
Divines watch over you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Korir. I am the Jarl of Winterhold. Winterhold is a location. Korir is present in Winterhold. Winterhold is a location. Winterhold is a city that has lost much of its history and power. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Hob's Fall Cave is a location. Hob's Fall Cave is a cave. Helm of Winterhold is an object. Helm of Winterhold is a helm that was worn by Hanse in the First Era. 
Winterhold has lost much of its history, and with that much of its power. I, Korir, the Jarl of Winterhold, aim to change that.
I've heard rumors of the resting place of the Helm of Winterhold, the very same helm that Hanse wore in the First Era. He was in line to be High King of Skyrim, you know. Having that might get the ear of the other nobles and give me some authority.
The Helm of Winterhold lies in Hob's Fall Cave. Recover it, and I'll You have Winterhold's thanks.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Dragon Bridge is a location. Dragon Bridge is a town. "Bandit Leader's Journal" is an object. "Bandit Leader's Journal" is a journal written by the bandit leader. 
Bandit Leader's Journal

5th of First Seed, 4E 201
Idiots! Brodir and Herd were at each others' throats again today, and nearly came to blows. The whole camp is on edge. I've ordered an extra ration of mead, but unless this fighting stops, we'll tear ourselves apart.

11th of First Seed, 4E 201
Rumor is that Herd's gathering followers for a mutiny. Brodir's not stupid; he's probably doing the same, just for insurance. I'd kill them both myself, but the camp's split right down the middle. If I tried, there'd be a knife in my back within a week.
I can't take this anymore. I've begun skimming a little gold from the take, bringing it down here when I can. If I can scrape enough together, I'll make a run for it, head downriver to Dragon Bridge.

28th of First Seed, 4E 201
Brodir's getting suspicious -- I caught him poking around in the cove this afternoon. I don't think he found my stash, but it's not safe here. I took the boat out tonight and stowed it on the island to the south, by the old tree stump.
Had a good haul this week. Another caravan or two and I can finally get out of here, and not a moment too soon.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dravynea the Stoneweaver. I am a mage from Morrowind. the mines is a location. Dravynea the Stoneweaver is present in the mines. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is a province. 
I was a mage back in Morrowind. I lend my talents to the mines here, helping them keep the tunnels safe. By Azura, it gets hot in there. I use Frost Salts for a potion to keep the heat bearable, but I'm out.
If you want to go to the trouble of getting me some frost salts, feel free. I suppose I could offer you a bit of free Alteration training when you get back.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Frida. I am an elderly female alchemist. Dawnstar is a location. Frida is present in Dawnstar. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a town. Shrouded Grove is a location. Shrouded Grove is a cave. Ring of Pure Mixtures is an object. Ring of Pure Mixtures is a ring that boosts an alchemist's talents. 
I'm Frida, the oldest woman in Dawnstar.
I picked up the herb trade from my husband. We used to go out in the wilds and collect ingredients together. He used to call me his "pretty Juniper." It's quite romantic, if you're an alchemist. Frost took the old fool a few seasons back, while he was looking for the Ring of Pure Mixtures.
I found the ring's resting place, Shrouded Grove, after he died, but I'm far too old to go exploring some cave, now. I'd be happy to give you some alchemy training in exchange for the ring, if you bring it to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Runil. I am a priest of Arkay and old, regretful elf. Falkreath is a location. Runil is present in Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a town. Darkshade Copse is a location. Darkshade Copse is a cave. Kust is present in Falkreath. Kust is Runil's male assistant. 
I am Runil, a priest of Arkay. I came into Arkay's light after the Great War. So many died by my hands, my magics.
I'm fortunate that Kust and the people of Falkreath have come to accept me as one of their own.
Could you do an old elf a favor? I misplaced my journal in a cave I was exploring. I'll pay for its return.
Blessing of Arkay to you for your help.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Noster Eagle-Eye. I am a former scout of the Imperial Legion. 
I'm Noster Eagle-Eye. I was the finest scout in the Imperial Legion, once. Tracked down all the places in the wilds that were causing people trouble.
Lost my helmet in one of the old caves. My pretty, pretty helmet. Life just got worse after that. Kept losing things. So many things....
Oh, could you find that helmet for me? I sure would love to have it again. Could show you some of my old scouting tricks.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Roggi Knot-Beard. I am a man from Kynesgrove. Kynesgrove is a location. Roggi Knot-Beard is present in Kynesgrove. Kynesgrove is a location. Kynesgrove is a mining village. Ansilvund is a location. Ansilvund is a cave. Knot-Beard shield is an object. Knot-Beard shield is Roggi Knot-Beard's family shield. 
I'm from from here. I've wandered a bit, but I always come back to Kynesgrove. My clan was one of the first to settle here.
Legend says that my forefather Lenne discovered the mines after he stumbled into a dark cave to relieve himself. Too much mead. Of course, there's another story of Lenne losing the family shield in a different cave, so it depends on who you believe.
According to my grandfather at least, the family shield should be in the cave. He swore that version of the legend was true, even found the cave old Lenne stumbled into: Ansilvund. Hey, if you find it, I could show you some of the clan's favorite fighting moves. They're all shield techniques.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Oengul War-Anvil. I am the stressed castle blacksmith. Windhelm is a location. Oengul War-Anvil is present in Windhelm. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. Cronvangr Cave is a location. Cronvangr Cave is a cave. 
Of course I am the castle blacksmith. What do I look like, a tavern wench? Ah, don't let my words cut you too deep. I've just been working the forge too hard. Trying to set this sword right.
Jarl wants it to look like an ancient blade. High Queen Freydis ruled over Windhelm in the Second Era, and her sword was legendary. Getting the real sword would be even better than making a copy, but no one wants to risk getting it from its resting place, Cronvangr Cave.
If you find that sword, traveler, I'd be grateful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Amren. I am Saffir's husband. Whiterun is a location. Amren is present in Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Halted Stream Camp is a location. Halted Stream Camp is a bandit hideout. Saffir is present in Whiterun. Saffir is a woman. 
I'm Amren, the husband of Saffir.
My Saffir doesn't like that I've been spending so much time looking for my father's old sword. He fed his entire family with the gold he made using that weapon. I'm not about to let it gather dust in some thief's trophy room.
I tracked it to a group of bandits nearby. The place is called Halted Stream Camp. But I'm no fool. I'd need the Whiterun guards or maybe hire some mercenaries to get it. I don't know why I'm saying this, but if you find it out in your travels, I'd be grateful to you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Shahvee. I am an Argonian woman. Black Marsh is a location. Black Marsh is a province. 
I'm Shahvee.
We Argonians have not fared well outside our native Black Marsh, but we're determined to make the best of things.
I began praying to Zenithar, the god of wealth, to bring us some fortune, but thieves made off with my sacred amulet almost as soon as I bought it.
If you found my Amulet, Shahvee would be in your debt, kind one.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dagur. I am an innkeeper. Dagur's inn is a location. Dagur is present in Dagur's inn. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Ranmir is present in Dagur's inn. Ranmir is a male drunk who used to be happy with Isabelle Rolaine. Vex is present in Riften. Vex is a woman. 
I'm Dagur, an innkeeper.
I wondered if I could ask a favor of you. It's about Ranmir. Don't get me wrong, I don't have a problem with him being in my inn all the time. He mostly keeps to himself, and so far he's been able to pay. I just hate to see what's happened to him. He hasn't always been like this, you know. Drunk, I mean.
He was a different person. Happy, outgoing... Like anyone who's in love. See, Ranmir was involved with a pretty young woman named Isabelle Rolaine. The two of them were very happy together, I thought. One day, she just disappeared. Ranmir was convinced she'd run off with someone else, leaving him behind. He turned to drinking, and what's left of him is what you see here every day.
I hoped that maybe if she could be found, if he had some sort of explanation, that maybe he could put himself back together. I'm in no position to go searching for her, but perhaps you could. Ranmir seemed convinced that Isabelle'd run off to Riften with someone named Vex. That's all I remember.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delvin Mallory. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. Bits and Pieces is a location. Bits and Pieces is a store in Solitude. 
Most of the establishments in Skyrim keep their transactions recorded within business ledgers.
Your job would be to change the numbers in those books so the shortfalls from our other jobs look legit. In this case, we want to waylay a shipment on the way from this business without them even noticin' anything went missin'.
Feel like doing a bit of writin' in Bits and Pieces in Solitude?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Olda. I am an annoyed wife.  is a location. Dragon's Breath Mead is an object. Dragon's Breath Mead is Horgeir's favorite mead. 
My husband Horgeir promised me, swore on his ancestors, that he'd give up the mead. And what do I find out?
He's been stashing drink in a cave nearby. He even has some wolves guarding it. I swear, I should just cut out his tongue. That would be the end of it.
You could get Horgeir's stash for me, but I'll keep my dagger sharpened just in case. You can help yourself to any drink you find, but bring me the bottle of Dragon's Breath Mead. It's his favorite, so I know he has one there.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard from Morrowind. Solstheim is a location. Neloth is present in Solstheim. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is a province where Neloth has made many enemies. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is a remote island. 
I'm under attack. There are too many coincidences. There must be someone behind all of my recent troubles.
I have enemies. Legions of them back in Morrowind. However, in this case I have reason to believe it is someone in Solstheim. First I need to identify the culprit. I've enchanted this ring to find the source of the attacks. Here, take it.
Just wear the ring I gave you. It will light up the source when you get close to it. I enchanted the ring with a bit of ash from the last ash spawn attack. It can follow the magical link back to its summoner.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a pompous master wizard of Telvanni. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. 
Where is that ash sucking steward of mine? Varona! Have you seen Varona? I'm hungry.
Find her. Tell her I want apple cabbage stew, with some canis root tea. After all, I don't make my own tea. I am a master wizard of the house Telvanni. Other people make tea for me.
You are not my servant? Obviously not, or you would have a cup of tea in your hands. I supposed you want to be asked nicely. Very well.
Please, oh hero of Skyrim. Please find Varona. I shall be ever so grateful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Modyn Veleth. I am captain of the Redoran guard. Raven Rock is a location. Modyn Veleth is present in Raven Rock. Raven Rock is a location. Raven Rock is a frontier town.  is a location. Emberbrand Wine is an object. Emberbrand Wine is a powerful and addicting alcohol drink. 
Modyn Veleth, Captain of the Redoran Guard at your service. Looking for something to lend a hand with? We have problems aplenty in Raven Rock.
Commanding the Redoran Guard can be a difficult task. Even the most experienced warriors can fall prey to petty distractions. They usually didn't amount to much, but they make my job that much harder. Some of my own men have become quite accustomed to a spirit they called 'Emberbrand Wine.' Despise the stuff myself. It's powerful and tremendously addicting... I've seen men fail to finish even a single flask.
If I knew where they were stashing the bottles, I'd put an end to it myself. Could you track down the stash? That would be helpful. I just don't have time to do it myself right now.
They're too smart to have left it in the Bulwark. I'd search one of the abandoned houses on the outskirts of town.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delphine. I am a member of the Blades. 
The Thalmor hunted us down. It wasn't exactly great for recruitment. But we have a headquarters of a sort now. We'll rebuild the Blades.
If you find anyone you think would make a good recruit, I can certainly take a look at them. Remember, though, being a Blade is a lifelong commitment. Their loyalty has to be with us once they're in.
After you have recruited enough new Blades, ask Esbern about the dragon lairs he's been studying. We'll have the recruits do some dragon hunting with you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's guildleader in the Dark Brotherhood. 
There's just one more target before we strike out at the Emperor.
Have you by chance heard of the "Gourmet"? Read his cookbook? It's become quite a phenomenon. The Gourmet is scheduled to cook for the Emperor at a special dinner.
You'll kill him, steal his Writ of Passage, and assume the role of master chef. Festus has been spearheading this part of the assassination plan. He's close to uncovering the identity of the Gourmet.
You should report to him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Festus Krex. I am a fellow Dark Brotherhood member. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city.  is a location. Anton Virane is present in the keep in Markarth. Anton Virane is a male cook. 
Let's get down to business. Astrid told you about the Gourmet, I hope? That you need to kill him and take on his identity?
But first you'll need to learn who he is. Assuming, of course, that the Gourmet actually is a "he." Could be a woman for all we know. In my, um, investigations, I came upon this. It's a copy of the Gourmet's cookbook. Ah, but not just any copy. It's signed you see! Seems to be a message from the Gourmet to one Anton Virane. I've tracked Virane to the keep in Markarth. It would seem he's the cook.
You are to obtain that information from Virane - who the Gourmet really is, and where he can be found. Oh, and when you're done with Virane, kill him. Loose ends and all that.
As I was saying... You'll need to kill the Gourmet, of course. But what's more, you'll need to get his Writ of Passage, so you can take his place. Oh, and if you can, hide his body. The longer it takes for anyone else to determine his real identity, the better.
Now off with you!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Quintus Navale. I am an alchemist. Throat of the World is a location. Throat of the World is a mountain, on the top.  is a location.  is a location. 
I have some thoughts about repairing the White Phial. There are three crucial elements. Some may be easier to find than others.
On the top of the Throat of the World is a patch of unmelting snow. No heat can touch it. Then we need the tusk of a mammoth, ground to a fine powder as only the giants know how. The final step is tricky. It requires the briar heart from a Forsworn of the Reach.
If you can bring me these materials, the Phial can again be made whole. You can keep the White Phial after I have repaired it. I fear keeping the Phial would just remind me of Nurelion's obsession, and how it consumed him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Laila Law-Giver. I am the lawful female ruler of Riften. Riften is a location. Laila Law-Giver is present in Riften. Riften is a location. Riften is a city.  is a location. Sarthis is present in the warehouse within Riften. Sarthis is a male Skooma dealer. Skooma is an object. Skooma is an illegal drug. 
We're aware of a Skooma dealer's presence in the warehouse within this city. Unfortunately, we're certain this Skooma dealer, Sarthis, has informants within the city guard. Every time we've made a move to arrest him, he's escaped.
However, if you'd take care of this discreetly, you might be able to surprise him without warning. Here, this is the key to the warehouse. See if you can drop in on this dealer of poison and convince him to close down his operation permanently.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Rustleif. I am a blacksmith. Skyrim is a location. Rustleif is present in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. "Night Falls on Sentinel" is an object. "Night Falls on Sentinel" is a book about Redguard culture. 
My wife Seren and I run the forge together. She still smiths even though we found out she is with child.
Our son or daughter isn't going to get much Redguard culture here in Skyrim. I know my wife worries how she will pass along her traditions.
Hey, if you find a book called "Night Falls on Sentinel", could you bring it to me? It's a story from my wife's people. Be good to have.
Don't know what the Redguards see in books, but it would make my Seren happy. Let me show you some tricks around the forge, when you return with the book.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Siddgeir. I am a pompous nobleman. Falkreath is a location. Siddgeir is present in Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a city. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Black-Briar Mead is an object. Black-Briar Mead is famous mead from Riften. 
You're here for work? I demand tribute before you can be considered for any real tasks.
How about drink? None of that local piss. Real Black-Briar Mead, fresh from Riften.
You better bring me my mead. I hate people who waste my time.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ysolda. I am an aspiring trader. Skyrim is a location. Ysolda is present in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. 
I'm Ysolda. Before my ma and da passed, I told them that one day, I'd become the best trader in Skyrim.
I met one of the caravan leaders, Ma'dran. He said he'd help get me started if I could bring him a mammoth's tusk. Easier said than done.
If you find one, I could teach you a thing or two about trading. Help you get a fair bargain in the future.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Lami. I am an alchemist. "Song of the Alchemists" is an object. "Song of the Alchemists" is a book on alchemy. 
I'm Lami, an alchemist. I picked up the alchemy trade when I was a girl. One of the temple healers staying here on a pilgrimage showed me the basics.
She had a book with her, "Song of the Alchemists", that I used to read over and over. I miss having a copy.
Could you find that book for me? I'd be happy to show you a bit about herbs if you find the book.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Captain Aldis. I am a captain of the Imperial Legion. "The Mirror" is an object. "The Mirror" is a book about shield work. 
I'm with the Imperial Legion. Train the recruits. Turn boys into men. That sort of thing.
Thinking of asking the General for some training books. Give the soldiers something to do while they're on rest. Something besides drinking. Ever seen a book called "The Mirror"? We used to hand it out to boys looking to learn basic shield work.
If you find a copy of "The Mirror", I'd be glad to have it. Then I'll see if I can get some copies made for the men.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Torbjorn Shatter-Shield. I am a mourning man. 
Please forgive my mood. I'm still coming to terms with my daughter's death. Our little girl died recently. I've been shouldering my days with strong mead, but nothing gives my Tova peace.
I've been looking for an Amulet of Arkay to remind my wife that our child is with the gods now, but I can't find one. Would you be willing to give me an Amulet of Arkay, should you find one?
I hope Arkay grants my wife some comfort.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vilkas. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Jorrvaskr is a location. Vilkas is present in Jorrvaskr. Jorrvaskr is a location. Jorrvaskr is the mead hall of the Companions. Driftshade Refuge is a location. Driftshade Refuge is the headquarters of the Silver Hand. Kodlak is present in Jorrvaskr. Kodlak is an old man, and the leader of the Companions. Wuuthrad is an object. Wuuthrad is a legendary battleaxe. 
The Silver Hand attacked us. They finally found enough courage to attack Jorrvaskr. We fought them off, but... The old man... Kodlak... he's dead.
No one else got hurt, but they made off with all our fragments of Wuuthrad. But you and I are going to reclaim them. We will bring the battle to their chief camp, Driftshade Refuge. There will be none left living to tell their stories. Only songs of Jorrvaskr will be sung.
We will avenge Kodlak. And they will know terror before the end.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brynjolf. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Riften is a location. Riften is a city in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. Riftweald Manor is a location. Riftweald Manor is Mercer Frey's home in Riften, a gift from the Black-Briars after they kicked the previous family out. Vald is present in Riftweald Manor. Vald is a male lowlife. 
I have an important task for you. I need you to break into Mercer Frey's home and search for anything that could tell us where he's gone.
Mercer's house is in Riften. A gift from the Black-Briars after they kicked the previous family out... a place called Riftweald Manor. He never stays there, just pays for the upkeep on it. Hired some lout by the name of Vald to guard the place.
Be careful, kid. This is the last place in Skyrim I'd ever want to send you. Just find a way in, get the information and leave. And you have permission to kill anyone that stands in your way.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Louis Letrush. I am a man. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Riften Jail is a location. Riften Jail is a jail in Riften. Sibbi Black-Briar is present in Riften Jail. Sibbi Black-Briar is a privileged man. Maven Black-Briar is present in Riften. Maven Black-Briar is Sibbi Black-Briar's mother, and a dangerous, powerful woman. 
I'm Louis Letrush. Looking for work? I need someone to deliver a message to Sibbi Black-Briar.
I recently approached Sibbi Black-Briar about buying Frost, one of the finest breeding horses in the realm. He agreed to sell. I paid Sibbi half the cost of Frost up front, but before he could deliver, Maven had him locked up. Sibbi believes this exempts him from our deal. It does not.
Head to the Riften Jail and talk to Sibbi. Get him to tell you where Frost and his Lineage Papers are and bring them to me outside Riften. You'll be well paid for your time.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Eltrys. I am a man who wants answers. Markarth is a location. Eltrys is present in Markarth. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Margret is present in Markarth. Margret is a woman who was attacked by a crazed man at the Markarth market. 
I'm sorry to drag you into Markarth's problems, but after that attack in the market, I'm running out of time.
You want answers? Well so do I. So does everyone in this city. A man goes crazy in the market. Everyone knows he's a Forsworn agent. Guards do nothing. Nothing but clean up the mess.
This has been going on for years. And all I've been able to find is murder and blood. I need help. Please. You find out why that woman Margret was attacked, who's behind the Forsworn, and I'll pay you for any information you bring me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Skjor. I am the player's superior in the Companions. Dustman's Cairn is a location. Dustman's Cairn is a tomb. Wuuthrad is an object. Wuuthrad is a legendary battleaxe. 
We have something special for you this time.
Last week a scholar came to us. He said he knew where we could find another fragment of Wuuthrad. He seemed a fool to me, but if he's right, the honor of the Companions demands that we seek it out in Dustman's Cairn.
This is a simple errand, but the time is right for it to be your Trial. Carry yourself with honor, and you'll become a true Companion. Farkas will be your Shield-Sibling on this venture, whelp. He'll answer any questions you have.
Try not to disappoint. Or to get Farkas killed.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Alessandra. I am a priest of Arkay. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Hall of the Dead is a location. Hall of the Dead is a hall where bodies are interred and cared for, in Whiterun. Andurs is present in Hall of the Dead. Andurs is a male caretaker. 
I am Alessandra, a priest of Arkay.
My father was a Priest of Arkay, as well. All my life was spent around the dead, being forced to learn the proper burial rituals and prayers. I never had any friends; who'd want to spend time with 'the little weird girl who hangs around dead people?' So I grew up with a miserable trade. This is all I know how to do... prepare and inter the deceased.
I'd like to make the journey to the Hall of the Dead in Whiterun and give my ceremonial dagger to Andurs, the caretaker. I believe once it's interred with my father's remains I'll be at peace with his memory.
A Priest of Arkay is entrusted with a ceremonial dagger once they've completed their training. It's usually given by the head priest who sanctified the ritual. In my case, the head priest happened to be my father. The thing is, I never wanted to follow in his footsteps... In some ways I still don't.
I'm entrusting you with the dagger. Bring it to Andurs and he'll take care of the rest.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vilkas. I am a fellow member of the Companions, and a werewolf. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the storied underworld of honorable heroes. Tomb of Ysgramor is a location. Tomb of Ysgramor is a tomb where lycanthropy can be cured. 
There is always work for the Companions. But there is more personal task before me.
Kodlak's final teaching is troubling me. I think he was right about beastblood and Sovngarde. I wish to cleanse myself that I might know glory in the afterlife.
Will you help me give up my beasthood? You still bear a head of the Glenmoril betrayers, yes? Then lead on, back to the Tomb of Ysgramor.
My soul is now prepared.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farkas. I am a Nord werewolf, and a fellow member of the Companions. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the storied underworld of the Nords.  is a location. 
There is always work. My mind is someplace else, though.
I think that maybe Kodlak was right. As a werewolf, I can't be a good Nord. I want to be clean, like he was, and go to Sovngarde when I finally die.
Aela said we would need a Hagraven's head. I already have one of them, but she said it was a special kind. And that you knew where to get more.
Let's go find one!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Pactur. I am the overseer of Bryling's mine. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Bryling is present in Solitude. Bryling is a harsh noblewoman. 
Bryling's already come down hard on us for missing shipments. Likely to do it again, since we're late.
You could take word to her in Solitude that there'll be a shipment soon. Buy us some time and keep her off our backs. In exchange, I'm willing to let a few ingots go missing. Maybe more than a few.
You'd do me quite a favor. I wouldn't forget it. I'm sure she'll be angry. Brace yourself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Silus Vesuius. I am a man. Skyrim is a location. Silus Vesuius is present in Skyrim. Morthal is a location. Morthal is a city in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. Ghunzul is present in Skyrim. Ghunzul is a dangerous marauder. Drascua is present in Skyrim. Drascua is a dangerous marauder. Jorgen is present in Morthal. Jorgen is a man. Mehrunes' Razor is an object. Mehrunes' Razor is an artifact of Mehrunes Dagon. 
I have a job you look perfect for.
A little history, first. After the Oblivion Crisis, a number of groups cropped up dedicated to wiping out the remnants of the Mythic Dawn. One of these groups found Mehrunes' Razor, the artifact of Mehrunes Dagon. They split it into three fragments and pledged to keep them apart forever. That was almost 150 years ago, and the pieces are still being kept by the descendants of that group. And they're right here, in Skyrim.
At least two of the owners, Ghunzul and Drascua, are dangerous marauders. And the third owner, Jorgen, I only know he lives in Morthal.
Here are my notes about them. I'll gladly pay you for getting the pieces any way you can. No questions asked.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Arngeir. I am a wise, old man. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province with many words of power. 
You have learned so much already, Dragonborn. Growing your gift too quickly would be dangerous.
But there are many Words of Power in Skyrim, carved in the Dragon tongue. Even from here, we can feel the Thu'um resonate from them. Finding these lost Words would be a sufficient test, to temper your abilities with experience.
We have felt the whisper of a Word. Give me your map, and I will show you where its echo can be found.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Styrr. I am a priest of Arkay. Temple of Divines is a location. Styrr is present in Temple of Divines. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a large city. Potema's Catacombs is a location. Potema's Catacombs is catacombs filled with Potema's undead minions. Potema, the Wolf Queen is present in Potema's Catacombs. Potema, the Wolf Queen is a former queen of Solitude, and one of the most dangerous necromancers in recorded history. 
Ah Potema, the Wolf Queen. Former queen of Solitude and one of the most dangerous necromancers in recorded history. She was responsible for the Empire's near collapse almost five hundred years ago. I believe I have a book about her...
And now Potema has been summoned in spirit form. Summoned in spirit form is not raised from the dead. She'll need help before she can return to the living.
For the moment, the Wolf Queen has retreated to a place filled with dead eager to serve her. She has gone to her old Catacombs. A few days ago, one of her servants busted through a wall into the Temple of Divines. We'll need you to go into the Catacombs themselves.
You were there when Potema was summoned. Being at the summoning created a connection to Potema, you are the one to stop her from returning to the living. I can provide you with some help with her minions.
As to Potema herself, find what's left of her body, likely a skeleton. Remove it from the Catacombs and bring it back to be sanctified by Arkay.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Odahviing. I am a dragon following Alduin. Dragonsreach is a location. Odahviing is present in Dragonsreach. Dragonsreach is a location. Dragonsreach is a trap for dragons. Skuldafn is a location. Skuldafn is Alduin's door to Sovngarde, an ancient fane high in the eastern mountains filled with Alduin's remaining forces. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the storied underworld where the souls of mortal heroes end up in. Alduin, World-Eater is present in Sovngarde. Alduin, World-Eater is a male dragon, likes devouring the souls of mortals. 
It was you that lured me here and took me prisoner... I have done nothing to earn your distrust.
Wisdom sees the doorway. It would be wise to recognize when you only have one choice. You can trust me. I am not treacherous. Alduin has proven himself unworthy to rule. I go my own way now. He has traveled to Sovngarde to regain his strength, devouring the souls of the mortal dead. A privilege he jealously guards... His door to Sovngarde is at Skuldafn, one of his ancient fanes high in the eastern mountains. I surely do not need to warn you that all his remaining strength is marshaled there.
Free me, and I will carry you to Skuldafn so that you can face Alduin in battle. I warn you, once you've flown the skies, your envy of the dragons will only increase.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's admirer, and a member of the Dark Brotherhood. 
Sleep well? Who I am really isn't as important as what I am. And what I am is an admirer. Of sorts.
You see, that little Aretino boy was looking for the Dark Brotherhood. For me, and my associates. Grelod the Kind was, by all rights, a Dark Brotherhood contract. A kill... that you stole. A kill you must repay.
If you turn around, you'll notice my guests. I've "collected" them from... well, that's not really important. The here and now. That's what matters. You see, there's a contract out on one of them, and that person can't leave this room alive. But... which one? Go on, see if you can figure it out.
Make your choice. Make your kill. I just want to observe... and admire.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard experimenting with the ash and Redguard magic. Druadach Redoubt is a location. Druadach Redoubt is a bandit camp. "Wind and Sand" is an object. "Wind and Sand" is a book written by Afa-Saryat. 
I've been trying to adapt Redguard magic to the ash. I think the key concept I'm missing is recorded in Afa-Saryat's book, Wind and Sand.
I have some associates and correspondents who find things for me. One of them has a credible rumor on where this book might be. And I'd like you to find the truth of the matter.
Go to Druadach Redoubt and fetch the book for me, will you?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nurelion. I am an old alchemist. Windhelm is a location. Nurelion is present in Windhelm. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. Forsaken Cave is a location. Forsaken Cave is a long forsaken cave to the west of Windhelm. Curalmil is present in Forsaken Cave. Curalmil is a crafty, long-dead alchemist, and the creator of the White Phial. White Phial is an object. White Phial is a legendary bottle that will replenish whatever fluid is placed inside of it. 
I've finally derived the location of the White Phial, but my doting busybody of an assistant won't let me get it.
It's buried with its maker, Curalmil, in Forsaken Cave, a long forsaken cave to the west of here. Curalmil was a crafty one, even in death. You would need the skills of a master alchemist to reach his resting place.
Luckily for you, I've already made the required mixture. Here, take it. Please... don't dally. I've wasted enough time arguing with my useless assistant here.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's leader in the Dark Brotherhood. Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary is a location. Astrid is present in Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary.  is a location. Night Mother's Chamber is a location. Cicero is present in Night Mother's Chamber. Cicero is an insane male member of the Dark Brotherhood, and the Night Mother's Keeper. Night Mother is present in Night Mother's Chamber. Night Mother is the corpse of the spiritual female leader of the Dark Brotherhood. 
Cicero concerns me. Ever since he arrived, his behavior's been... Well, erratic would be an understatement. I do believe he is truly mad. But it's worse than that.
Cicero's taken to locking himself in the Night Mother's chamber, and talking. To someone. In hushed, but frantic tones. Who is he speaking with? What are they planning? I fear treachery. As the Night Mother's Keeper, he believes he's entitled to the rule of this Sanctuary. Cicero will cite our independence as the need to revert to the Old Ways. He'll claim we're undisciplined, unruly. Heretical, even. Ironically, the Night Mother could prove to be just as much a victim. The queen in a fool's twisted game of chess.
I need you to steal into that chamber, and eavesdrop on their meeting. It'll be no use clinging to the shadows. They'll see you for sure. No, you need a hiding place. Somewhere they'd never think to look. Like inside the Night Mother's coffin.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Balgruuf the Greater. I am a nobleman. 
My youngest son, Nelkir, is a dark child. I don't know what to do with him.
He was always a quiet lad, but lately... something has changed. He's become brooding. Violent. He won't say a word to me, but I don't know how I upset him.
If you could speak to him. Draw out the truth. I would be immensely grateful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Balgruuf the Greater. I am a nobleman. High Hrothgar is a location. High Hrothgar is the secluded home of the Greybeards. Throat of the World is a location. Throat of the World is a high mountain.  is a location. 
So when the dragon died, you absorbed some kind of power from it. So it's true. The Greybeards really were summoning you. They are masters of the Way of the Voice. They live in seclusion high on the slopes of the Throat of the World.
Whatever happened when you killed that dragon, it revealed something in you, and the Greybeards heard it. If they think you're Dragonborn, who are we to argue?
The Dragonborn is said to be uniquely gifted in the Voice - the ability to focus your vital essence into a Thu'um, or Shout. If you really are Dragonborn, they can teach you how to use your gift.
You'd better get up to High Hrothgar immediately. There's no refusing the summons of the Greybeards. It's a tremendous honor.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Erandur. I am a priest. Dawnstar is a location. Erandur is present in Dawnstar. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a town. Nightcaller Temple is a location. Nightcaller Temple is a temple hosting the root of the nightmare problem, a short walk away from Dawnstar. 
The entire town is being plagued by horrible nightmares. They're in serious danger but I'm afraid there's little I can do about it.
These dreams are manifestations created by Vaermina. She has an awful hunger for our memories. In return, she leaves behind nightmares, not unlike a cough marks a serious illness. I must end her terrible influence over these people before the damage becomes permanent.
I need to return to the source of the problem, to Nightcaller Temple. Perhaps you'd be willing to assist me in that regard? I've already said too much. If anyone overhears what we're saying, it could start a panic. I would simply ask that you trust me and help me end Dawnstar's nightmares.
Nightcaller Temple is only a short walk from Dawnstar. Come, we must hurry.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am From-Deepest-Fathoms. I am a disturbed, babbling woman. Avanchnzel is a location. Avanchnzel is a deep ruin in the west. Lexicon is an object. Lexicon is an artifact of ancient people. 
You. You must take the Lexicon. Free me of my burden.
The memories. I cannot stand them. You must take them away, return them to Avanchnzel.
You must take the Lexicon from me. Please... take it now. You must bring it to Avanchnzel, in the west. Return it to them. It must go back.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Romlyn Dreth. I am a black market mead salesman. Riften is a location. Romlyn Dreth is present in Riften. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Black-Briar Meadery is a location. Black-Briar Meadery is a meadery in Riften that produces Black-Briar Mead. Ivarstead is a location. Ivarstead is a town. Vilemyr Inn is a location. Vilemyr Inn is an inn in Ivarstead. Wilhelm is present in Vilemyr Inn. Wilhelm is a male innkeeper. Indaryn is present in Riften. Indaryn is a male employee of the Black-Briar Meadery. Black-Briar Mead is an object. Black-Briar Mead is famous, good mead. 
I'm not selling cheap mead. I'm selling good mead for cheap... Black-Briar Mead. I sell cases of it for half of what the inns and taverns pay through the Black-Briar Meadery.
If anyone saw me leave Riften, they'd get suspicious. I need someone to take this small keg of Black-Briar Mead to Wilhelm at the Vilemyr Inn in Ivarstead. Drop it off and he'll trade you something for the delivery. Keep it as payment for the legwork.
Oh, and if you bump into Indaryn from the meadery, keep your mouth shut. He'd rat us out in a second.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am a fellow thief, and Vald's ex-lover. 
Vald? That pig? Oh, I have info on him. More than you care to know. Vald does not have a good side. The only thing he understands is gold. A man after my own heart.
You can try to buy him off, but he'll ask for a whole lot. I mean, you are asking him to betray Mercer Frey. Your best bet would be to erase his debt with Maven Black-Briar. If you talk to her, she might be able to give you the details.
Of course, you could just run him through and take what you need off of his corpse... I could care less.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brynjolf. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild, and the player's friend.  is a location. 
Well, my friend... the time's come to make it official. It's time to become our Guild Master.
Don't worry, I promise this will be short and sweet. If you'll just meet us in the center of the cistern room, we can begin.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Hafjorg. I am Elgrim's wife and business partner. Shor's Stone is a location. Shor's Stone is a mining village. Filnjar is present in Shor's Stone. Filnjar is a male miner. 
I swear, if I wasn't around, Elgrim would forget to eat his meals. How we make any coin at all is beyond me.
In fact, I need to arrange for someone to pick up an ore sample for me in Shor's Stone... goodness knows Elgrim won't lift a finger to do it.
You would do this for me? Oh, that would be wonderful. Speak to Filnjar in Shor's Stone. He's got some sort of ore sample he wants us to identify and was willing to pay us well for it.
The job pays well, so I hope I can make arrangements soon. We could really use the gold. I'll have Elgrim make some potions for you for all that travel.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ralis Sedarys. I am a treasure hunter from Mournhold. outside Kolbjorn Barrow is a location. Ralis Sedarys is present in outside Kolbjorn Barrow. Kolbjorn Barrow is a location. Kolbjorn Barrow is an ancient tomb buried in ash in the northern ashlands of Solstheim. Mournhold is a location. Mournhold is a large city on the mainland. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island covered in ash. Raven Rock is a location. Raven Rock is a town on Solstheim.  is a location. Relics of Ahzidal is an object. Relics of Ahzidal is rare antiquities. gold is an object. 
The name's Ralis. Ralis Sedarys, out of Mournhold.
I've got a financier waiting for me back on the mainland. Sent me here in the interests of obtaining some rare antiquities. The 'Relics of Ahzidal.' But this whole thing became a disaster right quick, let me tell you.
You come out to the northern ashlands, you don't expect things to go easy, you know? But this was something outside my particular expertise. When I first got to Kolbjorn, you couldn't even see it. Buried in the ash, like most other things on this blasted island. Dug out a pile of the stuff taller than me just to find the barrow. Who knows how much to reach the door. Excavating isn't exactly my specialty. Even if it was, the ash storms fill it in faster than you can dig.
Could you become my business partner? We can sort out the details of our little arrangement later, but for now, I'll manage the dig if you can manage the coin.
When you have 1,000 gold for me, I'll head back to Raven Rock and round up some diggers. Once we've got something worth looking at, I'll send word to you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farkas. I am a fellow member of the companions. Eastmarch is a location. Eastmarch is a region. 
There's some trouble in Eastmarch. Farmers getting troubled by some bad types who've built up a stronghold in the area.
There's nothing but a bunch of lowly bandits. Cowards, who will take little effort.
Take care of them. Do not spare them your blade.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tolfdir. I am the player's teacher at the College of Winterhold who likes to lecture on the dangers of magic. Saarthal is a location. Tolfdir is present in Saarthal. Saarthal is a location. Saarthal is an ancient tomb. Arniel Gane is present in Saarthal. Arniel Gane is one of the scholars of the College of Winterhold, a man. 
We are looking for anything at all that might be of interest. That's why I adore Saarthal... we have no idea what we're going to find. And if, along the way, my message about the dangers of magic should happen to sink in for a few students, that would be a happy coincidence.
Hmm. Well, why don't you see if you can assist Arniel Gane? He's one of our scholars, here working on cataloging our finds.
I expect he'd appreciate some help in locating any additional magical artifacts here in the ruins. Any enchanted items will do; the usefulness of the enchantment is irrelevant. If you find anything, the class can look it over.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Karliah. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild, and a Nightingale. Twilight Sepulcher is a location. Twilight Sepulcher is temple of Nocturnal. 
Are you ready to transact the Oath with Nocturnal?
By transacting the Oath with Nocturnal, you're entering into a business deal. You'll be provided all of the power and knowledge befitting a Nightingale. You're free to use those powers as you see fit to further your own goals or the goals of the Thieves Guild.
In return, you'll be required to defend the Twilight Sepulcher and everything within when the need arises. More importantly, upon your death, your spirit will be bound to the Twilight Sepulcher as one of its guardians.
Once the Oath has been struck, the terms are binding. Knowing this, are you ready to undergo the ceremony?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ralof. I am a fellow prisoner. 
Hey, Nord. Get up! Come on, the gods won't give us another chance!
See the inn on the other side? Jump through the roof and keep going! Go! I'll follow when I can!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vekel the Man. I am a fence. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a town. Yngvild is a location. Yngvild is ice caves. Arondil is present in Yngvild. Arondil is an insane male wizard, and a necromancer performing unspeakable experiments on reanimation. volumes of Arondil's journals, necromantic ravings is an object. 
I have a buyer with a very odd taste in literature, looking for some particular books.
I'm told they're the ravings of a madman, a wizard named Arondil, and his peculiar cravings. It's said to be in four volumes and very hard to come by. My client is offering quite a reward for them, which I'd split with you.
Recently, a woman was found... naked and shivering along the road to Dawnstar. The only information the guard could get from her were tales of strange experiments and Arondil scribbling in his journals.
He used to have a home in Dawnstar until they burned it down. The people say he was doing unspeakable experiments on reanimation... rituals only a necromancer would perform. After he made for Yngvild, he was never heard from again.
In his later years, Arondil moved into some ice caves known as Yngvild. He preferred the solitude in which to perform his, um... experiments.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tolfdir. I am an absent-minded mage. 
This is rather embarrassing, but it seems I've misplaced something.
I can't find my Alembic. I need it for some research. I suppose I could use another one, but... well, it sounds silly, but mine has sentimental value.
If you happen to see it, would you mind bringing it to me?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aela the Huntress. I am a member of the Companions, and a werewolf. 
Harbinger, I'd be honored if you joined me in my search.
I had once heard Skjor and Kodlak talking about the totems of Hircine. Simple-looking objects that could channel the powers of the werewolf in new directions.
Once Kodlak began looking for his cure, I'd wager Skjor didn't bring it up again. But I was going through his things and found a book I had never seen before. All about the Totems. I've been talking to my sources around the holds, and think I may have heard where one of them lays.
Want to come along and help me find this totem of Hircine?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the leader of the Dark Brotherhood. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a large city. Castle Dour is a location. Castle Dour is a castle in Solitude. Commander Maro is present in Castle Dour. Commander Maro is the male officer in charge of Titus Mede II's security. Titus Mede II is present in Castle Dour. Titus Mede II is the Emperor. Jarrin Root is an object. Jarrin Root is a powerful poison that kills immediately after one bite. 
So it's done. You've killed the Gourmet. And now Titus Mede II is as good as dead.
I've decided you will have the honor of killing the Emperor. Go now to Castle Dour in Solitude. Present the Gourmet's Writ of Passage to the officer in charge, Commander Maro.
You'll gain unrestricted access to the kitchens, and then the Emperor. You're posing as a chef, so you'll be able to poison his meal rather easily. Here, take this - it's called jarrin root. All it takes is one taste, and the effects are quite immediate. The Emperor will be serving Sithis before he even knows he's dead. Once Mede has been killed, escape through the upper door, and across the bridge. I've "arranged" for it to be unguarded once the alarm is sounded.
Now go, my friend. Go, and fulfill your destiny as Listener.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Paarthurnax. I am a wise dragon. Throat of the World is a location. Paarthurnax is present in Throat of the World. Throat of the World is a location. Throat of the World is Paarthurnax's mountain. Dovahkiin is present in Throat of the World. Dovahkiin is a mortal with the soul of a dragon. 
Greetings, traveler. I am Paarthurnax. Who are you? What brings you to my mountain? Forgive me. I gave in to the temptation to prolong our speech. I know you are Dovahkiin.
You have come here to learn from me. Patience. There are formalities that must be observed, at the first meeting of two of the dragons. By long tradition, the elder speaks first. Hear my shout! Feel it in your bones.
Match it, if you are Dovahkiin!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Revyn Sadri. I am a merchant dealing in used goods. Revyn Sadri's store is a location. Revyn Sadri is present in Revyn Sadri's store.  is a location. 
Of course nothing in here is stolen. Only a careless, shameful, idiotic fetcher would do something as stupid as to buy pilfered goods....
Oh by Azura, I've made a terrible mistake. I bought a gold ring, and Viola Giordano has been missing a ring that looks just like it.
Could you return the ring to her? It's not that easy. She'd go to the guard if she knew I was even remotely involved. You have to get it to her some other way.
Look, it's dangerous, but if you sneak the ring into her house. Put it in a dresser or something. I will make it worth your while.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tonilia. I am a fence, and a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Moon Sugar is an object. Moon Sugar is an illegal substance. 
Before we get down to business, I've got something I need you to do.
Well, as you know, the Guild's growing and things are looking up around here. The only thing we're lacking is a reliable way to transport our merchandise across the land.
I'm not sure if you've noticed, but there are several caravans that travel across the realm. They're shrewd traders and don't mind getting their hands dirty.
I've bartered with their leader, Ri'saad, on more than one occasion. I want you to bring him something. You see, the caravans are notorious for transporting illegal substances.
Present Ri'saad with this satchel of Moon Sugar, and I bet my last coin he'll make a deal.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kraldar. I am a nobleman. Winterhold is a location. Winterhold is the hold ruled over Kraldar. 
There is room in my court for a new Thane. It's an honorary title, mainly, but there are a few perks someone like you could make use of.
However, I could only grant the title to someone who is known throughout my Hold.
You help my people, and I'll make you my Thane.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Frea. I am a Skaal woman. outside Temple of Miraak is a location. Frea is present in outside Temple of Miraak. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island. Temple of Miraak is a location. Temple of Miraak is a temple. Miraak is present in Solstheim. Miraak is an ancient, evil man. 
I am Frea of the Skaal. I am here to either save my people, or avenge them.
Something has taken control of most of the people of Solstheim. It makes them forget themselves, and work on these horrible creations that corrupt the Stones, the very land itself. My father Storn, our shaman, says Miraak has returned to Solstheim, but that is impossible.
If you want to know what lies beneath the Temple of Miraak, then let us go together. First, we need to find a way into the Temple of Miraak.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard. 
Hmm. I have a new spell I'm working on. I hope to be able to conjure ash spawn.
If I could get a sample of ash from an ash spawn, that would be quite useful. I've made this special tool that will extract... well, you don't need to know the details. Just go harvest a sample.
Of course, the creature will have to be dead first, but I trust that's something you can... bring about. There will be some septims for your troubles.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Telrav. I am a man who was attacked by bandits. Nilheim is a location. Nilheim is ruins of a tower. 
Bandits attacked and ransacked my cart. Can you help me?
My camp is nearby in the ruins of Nilheim. Get me there safely and you'll be rewarded.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Skyrim is a location. Vex is present in Skyrim. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Atheron Residence is a location. Atheron Residence is a wealthy house house in Windhelm. 
One of the quickest ways to make some coin in Skyrim is to clear out some of the wealthier homes of their valuables.
If you're interested, I could point out a good place that could use a little housecleaning by stealing three items of value.
The place in question is the Atheron Residence in Windhelm. The people in this home recently got one of your fellow Guild mates sent to jail.
How about you make them pay for that? Just remember the order: do job first, get drunk second.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kodlak Whitemane. I am the leader of the Companions. next to Kodlak Whitemane is a location. Vilkas is present in next to Kodlak Whitemane. Vilkas is a male member of the Companions. 
You would like to join the Companions? Would you now? Here, let me have a look at you. Hm. Yes, perhaps. A certain strength of spirit.
How are you in a battle, child? Don't feel like you need to show off for our sake. Vilkas, here, will be the one testing your mettle.
Let Vilkas take you out to the yard and see what you can do.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Viarmo. I am the welcoming headmaster of the Bards College. Bards College is a location. Viarmo is present in Bards College. Bards College is a location. Bards College is a college for bards. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Dead Men's Respite is a location. Dead Men's Respite is a tomb. King Olaf's Verse is an object. King Olaf's Verse is a part of the Poetic Edda, the living history of Skyrim, a poem dealing with King Olaf. 
Welcome to the Bards College. I am Viarmo, the headmaster here.
Always a pleasure to meet a prospective bard. You should be aware that many apply but we accept very few people. When possible, we ask applicants to perform tasks the college needs completed. In this case, I do have a task befitting an aspiring bard...
Jarl Elisif has forbidden the Burning of King Olaf, a Festival put on by the Bards College. We need to change her mind. To convince her I want to read King Olaf's Verse. A part of the Poetic Edda, the living history of Skyrim. Unfortunately the poem was lost long ago.
According to our histories keeper, the portion of the Edda dealing with King Olaf might still exist in Dead Men's Respite. I need you to retrieve the poem.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city.  is a location. 
Why are you people doing this? Is it information you want?
This... this is about the inheritance, isn't it? All right! I'll tell you where I've hidden it. It's in a hollowed-out tree stump. In the marsh, south of Solitude. Now please, you'll let me go now. Right?
Why don't you be a dear and let me go now. All right? I won't say a word to anyone. Our little secret. I promise.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city.  is a location. 
I'll tell you anything. Anything! Just please stop... hurting me... I just... can't take the pain. Not a second longer.
I'll give you money. Treasure. I have some things hidden away. Take them all. They're yours. Just please... stop. Just north of Windhelm. There's a hollowed-out rock. I have some things hidden in there. Take them! They're yours.
I've told you everything I can. I don't know what else you could want...

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city.  is a location. 
Please... What is it you want?
Just... just stop. And I'll tell you where I've hidden my treasure. It's... in a hollowed-out rock. In the tundra. A bit west of Whiterun. Now please... please stop.
Oh gods, you've taken everything I have. Just kill me and be done with it...

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Riften is a location. Riften is a city.  is a location. 
You... you can't do this to me. Do you have any idea who I am? When my father hears about this, he will gut you.
Ah, now I understand. This is about my father's hidden cache, isn't it? The dowry for my wedding? Ha! Well it's safely hidden away, in a hollowed-out tree stump. Just outside Riften, tucked away nice and secure. You'll never find it.
Damn it. I gave it away, didn't I?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brynjolf. I am a member of the Thieves Guild. 
Well, well... Color me impressed kid. I wasn't certain I'd ever see you again!
So... now that I've whetted your appetite with our little scheme at the market, how about handling a few deadbeats for me? They are Keerava, Bersi Honey-Hand and Haelga.
They owe our organization some serious coin and they've decided not to pay. I want you to explain to them the error of their ways. Do this right, and I can promise you a permanent place in our organization.
Honestly, the debt is secondary here. What's more important is that you get the message across that we aren't to be ignored. A word of warning though... I don't want any of them killed. Bad for business.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Eola. I am a female cannibal. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Reachcliff Cave is a location. Reachcliff Cave is a tomb filled with undead. 
You were young when you first tasted human flesh, weren't you? A brother or sister had died? An accident, of course.
Then the hunger set in. Curiosity. What's the harm in just one bite? It's okay, now. You've found a friend who understands you. You can let go of your guilt.
A lot of our kind block out the memory of their first meal. The shame is too much. But you don't need to hide anymore. Namira, the Lady of Decay, accepts you for what you are.
She has a place for us, where we can sate our appetites without judgment. It's inside Reachcliff Cave. But the dead have stirred from their slumber recently, and I was forced here. Meet me there. We will fight our way to Namira's embrace together.
Until then, tell the people of Markarth that their dead won't be disturbed, anymore. We have bigger plans ahead.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Laila Law-Giver. I am the noblewoman who rules over Riften. Riften is a location. Laila Law-Giver is present in Riften. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Skooma is an object. Skooma is an illegal, dangerous drug. 
It's nice to receive good news for a change. Did you recover anything else from the warehouse worth mentioning?
If you have discovered the source of Skooma, then there's no time to lose. It won't take long for Sarthis's associates to learn of his death. The source of the poison must be destroyed once and for all, otherwise another dealer will simply take his place.
Do this task for me and you'll be well on your way to a title in Riften. Report back to me when your task is complete.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Torsten Cruel-Sea. I am a grieving father. Windhelm is a location. Torsten Cruel-Sea is present in Windhelm. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city.  is a location. Niranye is present in Windhelm. Niranye is a woman affiliated with the Summerset Shadows. 
My daughter Fjotli... she was murdered a few months ago. Left her laying on the ground in a pool of her own blood. I assume they were after her valuables... she always wore far too much jewelry in public. When I told her it'd be the death of her, I never thought...
No need to explain, I'm well aware of your Guild's methods do not include killing. It took me weeks, but I finally tracked down the killer. A bloody Altmer at that. Can you imagine? Let's just say I'm a firm believer in an eye for an eye and leave it at that.
The killer fancied himself a thief in some sort of a new Guild forming around here. Gave me some valuable information before... well, you know. Well, I think we can help each other. You recover what I'm looking for and take out a rival Guild in the process. One of the pieces stolen from Fjotli was a silver locket, a Cruel-Sea family heirloom. I want it back.
The only name I have is Niranye. Has a house right here in Windhelm. That's where you should begin looking.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aela the Huntress. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Hjaalmarch is a location. Hjaalmarch is a region. Orotheim is a location. Orotheim is a camp in Hjaalmarch. 
I've been hearing rumors of Silver Hand activity. A group of them has holed up in Hjaalmarch, in a camp called Orotheim.
Assassinate their leader and the rest should go hiding. Run fast, my friend.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Balimund. I am an old blacksmith. fire salts, strange minerals that burns as hot as lava is an object. 
Come to see Balimund perform miracles with steel, eh? Smithing's been in my blood for generations.
I owe my success to my forefathers and their recipe for flame. The secret is my forge. It consumes fire salts, a strange mineral that burns as hot as lava.
Sadly, this forge is dying and I've used the last of my fire salts. If I can't feed it soon, it may grow cold. Ten pinches of fire salts should give me all I need to bring this forge back to life.
Could you get the fire salts for me? I know that they are hard to come by, but they would save my business and warm an old smith's heart.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Narfi. I am a crazy man. 
Reyda was here, then gone. Went to gather plants and never came home... nope, nope. Everyone looked and no one could find her. Wilhelm said she'll be back... told Narfi not to worry... Reyda will come back.
With father I said goodbye... with mother I said goodbye. Reyda leaves and Narfi can't say goodbye. Makes Narfi very, very sad. Narfi needs Reyda to say goodbye.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aela the Huntress. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Eastmarch is a location. Eastmarch is a province. 
I've caught wind that one of the brighter Silver Hand has been sniffing around Eastmarch.
If you can sneak into the Silver Hand camp and steal their plans, we'll have the advantage. Hopefully the plans will let us know more about their movement.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Evette San. I am a spiced wine merchant.  is a location. Vittoria Vici is present in the docks. Vittoria Vici is a woman who handles shipments for the East Empire Company. 
Hello! I'm the spiced wine merchant Evette San. You wouldn't have a few minutes to run down to the docks would you?
I've got a shipment of spices the East Empire Company is holding up. I need someone to convince them to release it. The person handling shipments is called Vittoria Vici. You should try to talk to her about my shipment.
Get back to me when you're done and I'll give you something for your time. I swear it's a fight with them every shipment.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dinya Balu. I am a priestess of Mara. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. 
Riften is drowning in a sea of sin and wickedness and it's my personal mission to let everyone know that the warmth of Mara can see them through.
All I need is a messenger to bring Her words to these poor souls by distributing these missives. Lady Mara would be so pleased, if you could distribute the missives! Let me give you the missives. Here you are. Now make sure you give out every single one, we can't afford to let even one lost soul stray from Her warmth.
Almost anyone in Riften is in dire need of those missives. Speak to them, child. You will know who will listen and who will sin. A word of advice, keep away from the Keep and the city guards. They follow their own path and have already forsaken Her.
Allow me to give you Mara's gift as a reward... a true blessing to aid you in times of need. Despair not, her warmth will protect you always!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Shadr. I am a stablehand. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. 
I owe a great deal of money to someone and I think they cheated me. I don't know what to do.
I was able to work out a deal with the stables in Whiterun to sell me some of their tack and harnesses. I borrowed some gold from Sapphire to pay for the shipment, but it got robbed before it even arrived. Now Sapphire wants her money back, and if I don't pay her, I think she's going to kill me.
Can you help me pay off my debt? You should go talk with Sapphire about it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sylgja. I am an injured woman, and a good daughter. Darkwater Crossing is a location. Darkwater Crossing is a village where Sylgja's parents live. Verner is present in Darkwater Crossing. Verner is Sylgja's father. 
Would you happen to be headed towards Darkwater Crossing?
My parents live there. I usually make the journey to bring them gifts and to just say hello, but I haven't been well lately.
I've written some letters and placed them in a satchel. Perhaps you wouldn't mind delivering it to them on my behalf? I would insist on rewarding you for your time.
Here, take my satchel and give it to my father, Verner. He'll likely have something for you to bring back.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Bolli. I am a fisherman. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. The Silver Blood Inn is a location. The Silver Blood Inn is an inn in Markarth. Kleppr is present in The Silver Blood Inn. Kleppr is a male innkeeper. 
I'm Bolli, a fisherman.
I sell my catch across a good portion of Skyrim... it's worth its weight in gold to me. The only untapped market left is Markarth. However, I just got word that Kleppr at The Silver Blood Inn might be interested.
If you're headed that way, I would appreciate you delivering a purchase agreement for me. You'd be paid, of course. Kleppr will pay you as soon as you arrive with the letter. Here you are.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Mirabelle Ervine. I am the player's teacher in magic at the College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. Mirabelle Ervine is present in College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a school for mages in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Labyrinthian is a location. Labyrinthian is a ruin. Ancano is present in College of Winterhold. Ancano is a power-hungry male wizard. Staff of Magnus is an object. Staff of Magnus is a mage's staff that can absorb a tremendous amount of power. 
You need to get your hands on the Staff of Magnus. Now.
I've got to stay here, to see if we can get to Ancano and stop this. I need someone I can trust to do it. If the stories about the staff are true, if it really can absorb a tremendous amount of power, maybe we can break through Ancano's magic.
You know that the staff is in Labyrinthian? Are you... Are you sure? The staff is there? That can't be a coincidence. The Arch-Mage. Before... before he died. He... He gave me something just a little while ago. He told me it was from Labyrinthian, and that I would know what to do with it when the time came. I think... I think he meant this for you, then. I'm not sure why, but there was something very personal about it for him. Also, I think you should take this amulet. It belonged to Savos, but I think would do you the most good now. Take it, and get out of here.
Bring back that staff before Ancano brings the whole College down around us. If we can't stop this, what happens to the rest of Skyrim?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Degaine. I am an old beggar. outside the Temple of Dibella is a location. Degaine is present in outside the Temple of Dibella. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Temple of Dibella is a location. Temple of Dibella is a temple whose priests are exclusively women. 
You see that Temple? Way up there. All them women, keeping to themselves.
Won't let poor Degaine in, no. Not even for a look. But they've got a treasure in there. Gold statue, size of a child. Who knows what they use it for, but I know what I'll use it for.
Stealing it and selling it for profit. Well let's not put it like that. Wouldn't want the Thieves Guild catching wind of us, eh? Nah, just creep in and have a go at taking it out. I'll be here, and pay you half of what my man in Riften promised for it.
You'll be helping out an old beggar, and the gods smile on that sort of thing.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tsun. I am Shor's shield-thane, and the guardian of the Whalebone Bridge. Sovngarde is a location. Tsun is present in Sovngarde. Whalebone Bridge is a location. Whalebone Bridge is a perilous bridge. Hall of Valor is a location. Hall of Valor is Shor's lofty hall. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the storied underworld of heroic souls. Alduin, World Eater is present in Sovngarde. Alduin, World Eater is a dragon who is eating the souls of Sovngarde. Shor is present in Sovngarde. Shor is the chief of the gods. 
I am Tsun, shield-thane to Shor. The Whalebone Bridge he bade me guard and winnow all those souls whose heroic end sent them here, to Shor's lofty hall where welcome, well earned, awaits those I judge fit to join that fellowship of honor.
You pursue Alduin, the World Eater. A fateful errand. No few have chafed to face the Worm since first he set his soul-snare here at Sovngarde's threshold. But Shor restrained our wrathful onslaught - perhaps, deep counseled, your doom he foresaw.
Living or dead, by decree of Shor, none may pass this perilous bridge 'till I judge them worthy by the warrior's test.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Mercer Frey. I am the player's guildmaster in the Thieves Guild. outside Snow Veil Sanctum is a location. Mercer Frey is present in outside Snow Veil Sanctum. Snow Veil Sanctum is a location. Snow Veil Sanctum is ruins. Karliah is present in Snow Veil Sanctum. Karliah is an intelligent female thief, on the run from the Thieves Guild. 
Good, you're finally here. I've scouted the ruins and I'm certain Karliah is still inside.
I did not find her in flesh. No, I found her horse. Don't worry, I've taken care of it... she won't be using it to escape. Let's get moving, I want to catch her inside while she's distracted. Take the lead.
Just make certain you keep your eyes open. Karliah is as sharp as a blade. The last thing I need is you blundering into a trap and warning her that we're here.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Stands-In-Shallows. I am an old Argonian, and a Skooma addict. Gnisis Cornerclub is a location. Gnisis Cornerclub is an inn. Skooma is an object. Skooma is a drug. 
I feel like my scales are clawing into me. Maybe you could help an old Argonian out?
I heard some of the sailors talking about how they stashed a bottle of Double-Distilled Skooma in the Gnisis Cornerclub. I just need a taste.
Please, snatch the bottle for me. I'll be waiting for it. Then, let me show you a thing or two about not attracting attention to yourself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Malur Seloth. I am the sly, lazy steward of the Jarl of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages in Winterhold. Winterhold is a location. Winterhold is a city. Frozen Hearth is a location. Frozen Hearth is an inn. Nelacar is present in Frozen Hearth. Nelacar is an old male mage. 
I do nothing around here. And I hope to keep it that way. The Jarl is convinced I have some connection with the College, so he goes easy on me.
Maybe you'd like to help me keep up appearances? Old Nelacar has a mage's staff in his room in the Frozen Hearth. It'd be good to have that staff in case the Jarl starts wondering if I actually have a real connection to the College.
Pinch that staff for me. I'll be waiting for it. Once I have it, I'll show you a few tricks I've learned about buttering up royalty.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dengeir of Stuhn. I am a paranoid man who hates the Empire. Falkreath is a location. Dengeir of Stuhn is present in Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a town in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire that might break out of the Empire. Solitude is a location. Solitude is the capital city of Skyrim, under Imperial rule.  is a location. Lod is present in Falkreath. Lod is a male blacksmith. General Tullius is present in Solitude. General Tullius is a male Imperial general. 
There's a plot. Not against me. Against all of Falkreath. Those Imperial bastards are spying on every one of us.
Last night I saw Lod the blacksmith writing a letter. Probably sending word to Solitude and General Tullius. Are you loyal to Skyrim? Break into Lod's house and get that letter.
The Empire is probably making Lod smith up more swords and armor for them.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Perth. I am a miner. just outside Soljund's Sinkhole is a location. Perth is present in just outside Soljund's Sinkhole. Soljund's Sinkhole is a location. Soljund's Sinkhole is a mine connected to an old Nordic crypt. 
Whoa, there. I don't know where you're going, but stay out of that mine. It isn't safe.
We tunneled into an old Nordic crypt. The whole place is crawling with draugr. We're not mining up any ore with those undead around, so I wouldn't go down there if I were you.
You want to clear out the draugr? You're joking, right? Those bone-walkers will tear you limb from limb. But if you want to get yourself killed, go ahead.
I hear talk about a regiment coming to clear the crypt out. We'll see if that happens.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Avrusa Sarethi. I am a tired farmer. Avrusa Sarethi's farm is a location. Avrusa Sarethi is present in Avrusa Sarethi's farm. Aduri is present in Avrusa Sarethi's farm. Aduri is Avrusa Sarethi's younger sister. Jazbay Grapes is an object. Jazbay Grapes is acidic berries. Nirnroot is an object. Nirnroot is a rare herb. 
Sigh. I've got my hands full here. Between the farm chores, cultivating my supply of Nirnroot and keeping a tight rein on my sister Aduri, there's little time for rest.
Could you help me? One of the ingredients I need to cultivate Nirnroot are Jazbay Grapes... the acidic content of the juice is perfect for the soil. I need twenty of them for my current crop.
I'll give you something for your efforts... finding all of them might not be easy... or cheap.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ghorza gra-Bagol. I am an Orc Blacksmith who used to work for the Imperial Legion. 'The Last Scabbard of Akrash' is an object. 'The Last Scabbard of Akrash' is a book on smithing. 
You'd think an apprentice could forge a few hinges. Not Tacitus. I keep showing him how to treat the iron, but he never gets it.
In the Legion, the Imperial smiths used to read books when they couldn't set their hammers straight. Wisdom of the old, I guess. If you find a book called 'The Last Scabbard of Akrash', could you bring it to me? Tacitus sure isn't learning by example.
Books. Don't know why the Imperials like them so much. It should help the boy, though, Malacath willing. Bring the book, and I'll show you how an Orc learns to smith.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Morwen. I am a Skaal woman born in Skyrim. Skaal village is a location. Morwen is present in Skaal village. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a town in Skyrim. Runil is present in Falkreath. Runil is a male Priest. 
My mother, Bera, was Skaal, but she left the village and I was born in Skyrim. A trade ship from Skyrim struck ice off the coast near the village, and the Skaal took in the surviving sailors. My mother fell in love with one of the sailors - my father - and eventually returned with him to Skyrim.
I came across a few of my mother's old things not long ago. Among them was a necklace that my father gave to her when they were married. I believe she would want it placed upon her tombstone in Falkreath, as a symbol of her undying love and the great sacrifice she made for it.
If you find yourself in Falkreath, please give this amulet to the priest Runil and tell him that I sent you. He will understand. I don't have much to give in reward, but return to me when the task is done and I'll do what I can. Thank you, Skaal-friend.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Endon. I am a silversmith. Markarth is a location. Endon is present in Markarth. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Valenwood is a location. Valenwood is a distant province. Pinewatch is a location. Pinewatch is a small cottage, and a bandit hideout. 
Several months ago I ordered a special silver mold from some artisans in Valenwood. Well, it never arrived. Later I found out that it was robbed by a group of bandits led by someone named Rigel Strong-Arm.
Look, I talked to everyone with an ounce of authority... everyone. They all told me their resources were spread too thin right now. Word on the street says that the Thieves Guild is coming back into its own in Markarth so I figured... ...to send a thief to steal back what was stolen.
Look, this mold is irreplaceable. I'll pay you well for its return and I can also prove to be quite a valuable ally to the Thieves Guild.  The only thing I can tell you is that the mold was taken to the bandit's hideout... a small cottage called Pinewatch.
I'm not sure how many men they have inside, but I trust that won't be an issue for you. Good luck.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Heddic Volunnar. I am a scholar, giving quest via "Heddic's Volunruud Notes". Volunruud is a location. Heddic Volunnar is present in Volunruud. Volunruud is a location. Volunruud is an ancient tomb. "Heddic's Volunruud Notes" is an object. "Heddic's Volunruud Notes" is notes on Heddic Volunnar's research on Volunruud. Okin and Eduj is an object. Okin and Eduj is favored weapons when Tongue Chieftain Kvenel went into battle. 
Heddic's Volunruud Notes
by Heddic Volunnar

I was skeptical, but it's obvious now. The old hymns had truth to them! The relief wasn't far from the entrance, just as they said. I've no doubt now that it hides the entrance to Kvenel's tomb.
The two keys must be hidden somewhere nearby - ceremonial replicas of Okin and Eduj, favored weapons when Kvenel went into battle. I don't dare explore further without hiring bodyguards to accompany me, however. To think - The Tongue Chieftain Kvenel could be entombed behind just a few feet of stone! The ancestor we scarcely believed was real.
Twice damned for planning this foolish scouting trip. I should have hired those sellswords in the first place. Perhaps there's no need. This place is just a tomb, after all, and there are no obvious signs of habitation. It isn't as though the thousand-year dead will mind if I have a look around.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Skjor. I am the player's superior in the Companions. Skyforge is a location. Skyforge is a forge where Eorlund works. Underforge is a location. Underforge is a hidden cave.  is a location. 
I have something a little different planned this time. But it's not for everyone to hear. Meet me in the Underforge tonight.
Oh yes, you don't yet know where the Underforge is. I forget that you've never seen it. Beneath the Skyforge, where Eorlund works.
All I say is that you will receive a gift. A gift that will join your spirit with the beast world, friend.
The door to the Underforge is hidden, but I will show you the way.  We will speak more.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Captain Valmir. I am an officer of the Imperial Legion. Forelhost is a location. Captain Valmir is present in Forelhost. Atmora is a location. Atmora is a lost northern continent. Forelhost is a location. Forelhost is the last great bastion of the Dragon Cult. 
You there! As an officer of the Imperial Legion, I require your assistance to complete my mission.
The General has sent me to obtain a powerful weapon for the war effort. This was the last great bastion of the Dragon Cult, and their leader's mask was reported to be quite powerful.
They were among the first men to arrive from Atmora and they worshiped certain animals as avatars of the Gods; Dragons being foremost. And for their bloody sacrifices, the Dragons gifted their priests with terrible power. But their cruelty was too great for men to bear, and they rose up in what would be called the Dragon War and the Cult swept from the land.
I'll pay for the Dragon Cult leader's mask. Get in there, find the mask, return it to me, and earn your pay.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Amaund Motierre. I am a nobleman. a crypt is a location. Amaund Motierre is present in a crypt. Black Sacrament is an object. Black Sacrament is a dark ritual to obtain the services of the Dark Brotherhood. 
By the almighty Divines. You've come. You've actually come. This dreadful Black Sacrament thing... it worked.
Well, I won't waste your time. I would like to arrange a contract. Several, actually. I daresay, the work I'm offering has more significance than anything your organization has experienced in, well, centuries.
As I said, I want you to kill several people. You'll find the targets, as well as their manners of elimination, quite varied. I'm sure someone of your disposition will probably even find it enjoyable. But you should know that these killings are but a means to an end. For they pave the way to the most important target. The real reason I'm speaking with a cutthroat in the bowels of this detestable crypt. For I seek the assassination of... ...the Emperor.
What I ask is no small thing, of course. But you represent the Dark Brotherhood. This is... what you do? No? You must understand. So much has led to this day. So much planning, and maneuvering. Now, it's as if the very stars have finally aligned. But I digress. Here, take these two items. They need to be delivered to your, um... superior. The sealed letter will explain everything that needs to be done. The amulet is quite valuable - you can use it to pay for any and all expenses.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Grisvar the Unlucky. I am a fellow prisoner. Skooma is a location. Skooma is a drug made from moon sugar. 
Ah, you want protection? I can get you what you need. Maybe you can do something for me, first?
Duach has a bottle of Skooma. Finest distilled Moon Sugar. I'm shaking just thinking about it.
Get that bottle of Skooma, and I'll have a shiv ready for you. Promise you won't ever use it on me, okay?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. 
When a client needs us to eliminate another, we don't operate like the Dark Brotherhood. We find alternate means to get them out of the way.
We send you to plant some phony evidence in the mark's house, and then tip off the town guard... the rest takes care of itself. Sound like you can handle it?
Go place an item as evidence inside Carlotta Valentia's home. She must have ticked-off our client badly. The client's impatient and keeps asking if the job's done. Can you get him off my back?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Urag gro-Shub. I am a librarian who can translate the writings of Shalidor. Labyrinthian is a location. Labyrinthian is a labyrinth built by Shalidor. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. 
Have you ever heard of Shalidor? Immensely powerful mage, back in the First Era. Had an understanding of magic few have ever matched. He holed himself up in Labyrinthian, and devoted all of his time to research and study. Wrote more than you would imagine possible.
Since then, his writings have been scattered all over Skyrim, but are little use to anyone who can't translate them. I'm one of the few who can. I'm always trying to find more of Shalidor's writings.
I've heard whispers of more of his work having turned up. If you can track it down, it may prove useful to all of us.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ondolemar. I am a Thalmor agent. Markarth is a location. Ondolemar is present in Markarth. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Ogmund the Skald is present in Markarth. Ogmund the Skald is an old, respected man. Jarl is present in Markarth. Jarl is the nobleman who rules over Markarth. 
I was sent here to lead the Thalmor's interests in this corner of the world. It's my mission to root out all Talos worship in this city.
You're awfully inquisitive, aren't you? I like that. Perhaps you'd care to solve a little problem I'm having? Ogmund the Skald. He's old, respected, and I know for a fact that he worships Talos in his home. But the Jarl has been hesitant to call for his arrest. I want you to break in to his home and find evidence.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Adril Arano. I am the second councilor of Raven Rock, and a loyal underling of Councilor Morvayn. Raven Rock is a location. Adril Arano is present in Raven Rock. Raven Rock is a location. Raven Rock is a city. Retching Netch Cornerclub is a location. Retching Netch Cornerclub is a bar in Raven Rock. Councilor Morvayn is present in Raven Rock. Councilor Morvayn is the nobleman who rules over Raven Rock, a member of House Redoran. Geldis Sadri is present in Retching Netch Cornerclub. Geldis Sadri is a knowledgeable barkeeper. 
After everything you've already done for Raven Rock, I hate to ask for more but I can't risk Councilor Morvayn being killed.
The Ulen Family of House Hlaalu, a rival Great House, has placed a deathmark on the Councilor's head. I need you to start out by being my eyes and ears... search Raven Rock and see if you can root out these traitors.
The best place to start would be Geldis Sadri over at the Retching Netch Cornerclub. If he provides you any leads, check them out before bringing them to my attention. I can't afford to make any mistakes.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Anska. I am an excited woman.  is a location. Vokun is present in Vokun's crypt. Vokun is a powerful old male priest who was buried long ago. 
I'm Anska. Are you here to help?
I've finally located Vokun's crypt! The scroll I'm looking for just has to be here. Maybe you could help find it, I just know it's in here.
Vokun is some old priest buried here long ago. I've been searching for his tomb for a few years now. If Vokun is as powerful as I think, I may need a little help um... dealing with him. With the two of us this should be easy.
You can have anything except the scroll of course. It's probably meaningless to you, but according to family legend it links our bloodline back to Ysgramor himself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Talen-Jei. I am an Argonian man who wants to marry Keerava. Riften is a location. Talen-Jei is present in Riften. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Black Marsh is a location. Black Marsh is a realm far away. Keerava is present in Riften. Keerava is a female Argonian. 
I met Keerava when I wandered into Riften a few years ago. Been smitten with her ever since. In fact, I'm thinking of asking her to marry me.
In Black Marsh, tradition dictates we present a potential mate a unique wedding ring to represent our future bond. I already have the gold band, but all I need are three flawless amethysts to complete the setting.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Idolaf Battle-Born. I am a man, giving quest via "Letter from Idolaf Battle-Born". Whiterun is a location. Idolaf Battle-Born is present in Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. "Letter from Idolaf Battle-Born" is an object. "Letter from Idolaf Battle-Born" is a letter to the player from Idolaf Battle-Born. 
Letter from Idolaf Battle-Born
by Idolaf Battle-Born

Dragonborn,
I'm aware of your recent assault on Nazeem. Rest assured I have no interest in that particular matter. I do, however, have an interest in your willingness to employ force when the need arises.
If you are able to assist me, I will gladly pay you for your troubles.
Next time you are visiting Whiterun, please call on me.
Sincerely, Idolaf Battle-Born

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Selveni Nethri. I am an amicable necromancer. Southfringe Sanctum is a location. Selveni Nethri is present in Southfringe Sanctum. Southfringe Sanctum is a location. Southfringe Sanctum is the home of Bashnag's dangerous coven. Bashnag is present in Southfringe Sanctum. Bashnag is a skilled male necromancer. 
Thanks for getting me out of that. Bashnag's coven chased me out and left me for dead down here. Nobody lasts too long with the spiders.
Please, will you help me get out of here? If the coast is clear, I'll make a break for it. We - well 'they', Bashnag's circle of mages, live here. They made it pretty clear that I'm no longer welcome. These are no dainty college mages. Bashnag has the skill of a magister and the mind of a warlord.
This is a dangerous bunch. They're good company if you want to study necromancy in peace, though.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Balgruuf the Greater. I am the nobleman who rules over Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Balgruuf the Greater is present in Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. High Hrothgar is a location. High Hrothgar is the secluded home of the Greybeards, and neutral territory to both sides of the war. 
I want to help you, Dragonborn. And I will. But I need your help first.
Ulfric and General Tullius are both just waiting for me to make a wrong move. Do you think they will sit idle while a dragon is slaughtering my men and burning my city? No. I can't risk weakening the city while we are under the threat of enemy attack. I'm sorry.
If only you could negotiate a truce between Ulfric and General Tullius. Then I would be glad to help you with your mad dragon-trapping scheme. But getting both sides to agree to a truce will be difficult at this point. The bitterness has gone too deep. Maybe... hmm... what of the Greybeards? They are respected by everyone. High Hrothgar is neutral territory. If the Greybeards were willing to host a peace council... then maybe Ulfric and Tullius would have to listen.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Mercer Frey. I am the player's guildleader in the Thieves Guild. Goldenglow Estate is a location. Goldenglow Estate is an estate that used to send protection money to the Thieves Guild. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. East Empire Company is a location. East Empire Company is a merchant house in Solitude. Gulum-Ei is present in East Empire Company. Gulum-Ei is a male Thieves Guild informant within the East Empire Company. 
Ah, there you are. I have a job for you.
Gulum-Ei is our inside man at the East Empire Company in Solitude. I'm betting he acted as a go-between for the sale of Goldenglow Estate and that he can finger our buyer.
Get out there, shake him down and see what you come up with. Talk to Brynjolf before you leave if you have any questions.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ainethach. I am the owner of the Sanuarach Mine in Karthwasten. Karthwasten is a location. Ainethach is present in Karthwasten. Sanuarach Mine is a location. Sanuarach Mine is mines. Karthwasten is a location. Karthwasten is a mining village. 
The Silver-Bloods are trying to muscle in on my land. Forsworn attack the mines, and suddenly all these sellswords show up in Karthwasten to 'help.' They won't let anyone work until I sell it off.
You can try to convince them to leave, but I'd keep your sword-arm ready if things get ugly.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Captain Wayfinder. I am a sea captain by inheritance. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a famous college of mages. Sea Squall is a location. Sea Squall is Captain Wayfinder's ship.  is a location. Fine-Cut Void Salts is an object. Fine-Cut Void Salts is valuable salts. 
I am a sea captain by inheritance, as my men are fond of saying. Can't blame them, my mother ran the Sea Squall as strictly as she ran the house.
I've been trying to find new areas of business, trying to win the sailors' respect, but I keep having problems. Take the last trade we did. Some Fine-Cut Void Salts from the College of Winterhold. Plenty of coin if you know who to sell it to.
What happened to the Salts? Sailors are what happened to them. They got drunk and ended up losing the merchandise in some cave. If you're not afraid of little exploring, I'll pay good gold to get those Salts.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's guildmaster in the Dark Brotherhood. Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary is a location. Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary is the headquarters of the Dark Brotherhood.  is a location. "Silence, my brother." is an object. "Silence, my brother." is the passphrase to the Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary. 
I would like to officially extend to you an invitation to join my Family: the Dark Brotherhood.
In the southwest reaches of the realm, in the Pine Forest, you'll find the entrance to our Sanctuary. It's just beneath the road, hidden from view. When questioned by the Black Door, answer with the correct passphrase: "Silence, my brother." Then you're in. And your new life begins.
I'll see you at home.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farengar Secret-Fire. I am a wizard. Whiterun is a location. Farengar Secret-Fire is present in Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Arcadia is present in Whiterun. Arcadia is a female alchemist. 
I believe I am, yes. Technically speaking, of course. The city is also home to a priest, a priestess, an alchemist, and I'm sure others who practice. Ah, that reminds me. Speaking of alchemists, I have some frost salts for Arcadia. She asked me to obtain them for one of her potions.
Would you be so kind as to deliver the frost salts for me? I'm sure Arcadia will provide some form of recompense

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Rogatus Salvius. I am a farmer who does not think highly of Leontius. Old Hroldan Inn is a location. Old Hroldan Inn is and old inn to the south. Leontius is present in Old Hroldan Inn. Leontius is Rogatus Salvius' son, a drunk. 
My boy Leontius lives in Old Hroldan. Old inn to the south.
Damn drunk. The oaf doesn't even bother to visit these days. What am I supposed to do if the dragons burn down the farm?
You're a traveler, right? I have this letter for him. Let him know how much of a failure he is. You make sure the lug tips you when he gets it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Falion. I am a great mage who knows many things. 
I know many things. I have studied things beyond the reach of most humans, traveled the other planes, seen things one should not see.
I have met gods and long-dead races of people and everything in between and I know enough to see a vampire where others would see a man. I met several of your kind during my studies of life-extending magics. I even considered becoming a vampire myself. In the end, vampirism would endanger my ward Agni which would defeat the intended purpose.
It is possible to cure vampirism. I know of a ritual but I've never performed it. It requires a filled black soul gem. You will need to kill someone. When you have a gem and have filled it return to me and I will perform the ritual. I will bring life to your dead body, vampire.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Madesi. I am a jeweler. a city is a location. Madesi is present in a city. 
I make my own jewelry. Sadly, I'm one of the few traditional Saxhleel jewelers that remains in Tamriel; it's becoming a lost art. Only trouble is gathering materials has become hazardous. The roads to the mines and to the other cities are thick with bandits... and worse.
Would you be interested in gathering some materials for me? I'd certainly be happy to compensate you. I'm seeking a small list of items to complete my next creation: two flawless sapphires, a mammoth tusk and a chunk of gold ore.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Giraud Gemane. I am a bard of the Bards College, and a former soldier. Bards College is a location. Bards College is a college for bards. Halldir's Cairn is a location. Halldir's Cairn is a tomb of Halldir. Halldir is present in Halldir's Cairn. Halldir is a long-dead male ruler. 
They found it! They actually found Rjorn's drum!
You don't know who Rjorn is? You're joking, right? Rjorn? Only the most famous battle drummer of the second age. Well, famous among bards at least. That drum has been in half a dozen famous battles. It's a priceless artifact.
Nobody knows where he died, and therefore where his drum might be. Halldir was the missing link. Rjorn was always looking for new stories to tell. It seems he was writing a lay about Halldir when he vanished. Rjorn entered Halldir's Cairn in secret, and presumably died there.
Now all I need to do is find someone to get it. Wait. You. You could do it. I need you to get me that drum. The college treasury is a bit thin right now. But I can show you some tricks I learned from my days with the army.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Orthus Endario. I am an employee of the East Empire Company. East Empire Company's rundown offices in Windhelm is a location. Orthus Endario is present in East Empire Company's rundown offices in Windhelm. Hammerfell is a location. Hammerfell is a realm. Vvardenfell is a location. Vvardenfell is an island. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. Suvaris Atheron is present in Windhelm. Suvaris Atheron is a female dark elf, and the meticulous overseer of the Shatter-Shields' shipping operation. 
Sad, isn't it? We can't afford to keep the place running since these attacks started. Pirates, you see. Raiding all along the coast, from Hammerfell to Vvardenfell.
Our own security forces are limited, and all the mercenaries are tied up in this ridiculous war. We don't even know their base of operations, and attacking single ships won't really solve the problem.
Only the Shatter-Shields appear safe. They are a very powerful family here in Windhelm. They run a private shipping operation, and would love to have the docks to themselves. Wouldn't surprise me if they were in league with the pirates, somehow.
Not yet, no. But perhaps an intrepid person such as yourself could help with that. They have a dark elf who oversees their operations. Suvaris Atheron. She's meticulous to a fault, and keeps a logbook with every transaction she makes.
If you get me the logbook, I'll have proof of Shatter-Shield's treachery.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Svari. I am a young girl. 
Mum doesn't say much since Uncle Roggvir died. She doesn't even go to temple anymore. I wish she would. At least that way she'd have people to talk to.
Maybe you could convince her. You should go do it right now.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aela the Huntress. I am a fellow member of the companions. Eastmarch is a location. Eastmarch is a region. Cragslane Cavern is a location. Cragslane Cavern is a cave in Eastmarch. Wuuthrad is an object. Wuuthrad is a legendary battleaxe. 
The Silver Hand has been scouring the world for more pieces of Wuuthrad. A group of their members has managed to secure one of the pieces.
They have gone hidden out in Eastmarch, somewhere inside Cragslane Cavern. The piece of Wuuthrad should be there with them.
Get that piece of Wuuthrad back, for the honor of us all.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Mirabelle Ervine. I am the player's teacher in magic. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Mzulft is a location. Mzulft is a ruin in Skyrim. Staff of Magnus is an object. Staff of Magnus is a legendary mage's staff. 
The Synod seemed convinced the Staff of Magnus was somewhere in Skyrim. They inquired about the ruins of Mzulft, but that's all I remember.
It sounded like they were heading there, though they were rather secretive about why. I suppose if you're intent on looking for the staff, there's a chance they might be in Mzulft yet. Just don't expect them to be cooperative.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Colette Marence. I am a fellow member of the College of Winterhold. 
Look at you. Such a devoted student of Restoration. It's comforting to see that not everyone has dismissed it as entirely as most members of the College. Truly comforting.
It looks like you're ready to speak with the Augur. He was a brilliant mage. Truly inspired. Mastered spells others could barely comprehend. He was especially gifted when it came to Restoration.
The Augur's... Well, he's very particular about who shares the knowledge. So you'll need his approval first. Go on, go talk to him. I'm sure he's been paying attention, and will be expecting you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sergius Turrianus. I am a mage. Common Soul Gems is an object. Common Soul Gems is mage supplies. 
I need some more supplies. Can you help out with that?
I'm running low on Common Soul Gems. Bring me another seven of them, if you can.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Bujold the Unworthy. I am the leader of the warriors of Thirsk Mead Hall. outside Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Bujold the Unworthy is present in outside Thirsk Mead Hall. Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Thirsk Mead Hall is a mead hall, the home of Bujold the Unworthy and his warriors, up there on the hill. Rieklings are tenacious creatures that attack people in large packs. Rieklings are enemies. 
What's going on here is that we've been kicked out of our home. The Thirsk Mead Hall, up there on the hill. We were... some Rieklings have taken it over.
Rieklings overcame us with tenacity and numbers. Didn't help that we'd grown a little too comfortable up there. Too much mead. Too many stories. Too few battles.
Are you... offering to help? Some new blood should be enough to rouse these layabouts to actually fight again.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vilkas. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Rift is a location. Rift is a region. Faldar's Tooth is a location. Faldar's Tooth is a bandit lair in the Rift. 
We've received a desperate missive. A citizen of the Rift has been kidnapped.
The Companions have been asked for assistance, and we shall answer. Particularly when the pay is as good as this.
Get moving. Find the kidnapped citizen at Faldar's Tooth and save them. I shudder to think what might happen if you're too late.
Bring honor to the Companions and yourself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Galmar Stone-Fist. I am the player's commanding officer in the Stormcloaks. Fort Neugrad is a location. Fort Neugrad is an Imperial fort.  is a location. 
You're going to Fort Neugrad. The Imperials have some of our boys locked up there. But with a little luck, we can turn that to our advantage.
I've sent some men to scout out the area. Meet them near Fort Neugrad, see if you can't find a way to slip in the fort, free our men, and take over the fort. They'll never suspect an attack from the inside. This won't be easy. But that's why I'm sending you.
You got the grit to get this done?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Illia. I am a repenting mage who has never killed an innocent person. Darklight Tower is a location. Darklight Tower is a tower filled with witches and Hagravens, and Illia's former home. 
By the gods! I know this looks bad. Let me explain...
I called Darklight Tower home, now I know that was a mistake. I am, or was part of a coven serving the Hagravens that live there. So was she.
We were supposed to find a sacrifice. Human sacrifice. I told her I couldn't do it and she attacked me. I've done horrible things living here, but never taken an innocent life. I couldn't just find some person for them to kill. We needed a sacrifice for the Initiation. My mother is going to become one of those things, Hagravens. I can't be a part of that. Gods, I can't run away from this.
I'm going up there to stop her. This cycle must end. I don't know what brought you here, but I could use your help, if you're willing. Follow me. We have to fight our way up the Tower. I don't think anyone else here is about to have a change of heart.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am the player's passive-aggressive superior in the Thieves Guild. 
I'm going to make this short and sweet, because frankly I don't think you deserve another shot. You've broken the rules and now you need to pay... and it's going to cost you quite a bit: 1,000 gold.
You claim to be a thief... act like one. Pick pockets, knock over houses... heck, I don't care if you have to bust into a palace. You do what you have to do to come up with the coin.
Anything you steal, you bring it straight to me. Now get out of here and don't come back until your pockets are full. Only then you're one of us again.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Pantea Ateia. I am a bard. Hob's Fall Cave is a location. Hob's Fall Cave is a necromancer base. 
That damn fool! I should wring Larina's neck! That fool student of mine stole my flute and sold it to some necromancer in Hob's Fall Cave.
Apparently Larina told him some story about the flute being able to make the dead dance. It's just a flute. A really old and valuable flute, but just a flute. I just got a ransom note for it. That flute has been handed down for seventeen generations!
Well don't just stand there. Go get my flute! I don't have any money to give you. but I can show you a few tricks I learned playing for wizards.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Fethis Alor. I am a merchant who used to sell East Empire Pendants. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island with old East Empire Company mines. East Empire Pendants is an object. East Empire Pendants is popular amulets that were made exclusively for the East Empire Company, a popular collectible. 
Mining gear? No. However, I used to sell East Empire Pendants until I ran out of them. Popular little item.
It's an amulet that was made exclusively for the East Empire Company. They gave them to their workers as an incentive at one point... a kind of reward for extra effort. They're no longer being made, so they've become collectible. I'd love to get my hands on a few of them.
They could be anywhere on the island. The mines might be a good place to start. If you find any while you're exploring Solstheim, bring them here and I'll pay you for them.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Eisa Blackthorn. I am a bandit from Kyr's gang, giving quest via "Eisa's Journal". Frostmere Crypt is a location. Eisa Blackthorn is present in Frostmere Crypt. Frostmere Crypt is a location. Frostmere Crypt is a crypt that contains a whole forest with a big old monument out in the center. Kyr is present in Frostmere Crypt. Kyr is a male bandit leader. Ra'jirr is present in Frostmere Crypt. Ra'jirr is a tough male bandit. Pale Lady is present in Frostmere Crypt. Pale Lady is a swamp lady who abducts children at night. "Eisa's Journal" is an object. "Eisa's Journal" is Eisa Blackthorn's journal. 
Eisa's Journal
by Eisa Blackthorn

Night shift woke me to say they'd hit something big. Kyr, Ra'jirr, and I went down to take a look. It's huge, like a whole forest was just swallowed up by the earth, with a big old monument out in the center. Kyr took a sword from the monument as a trophy and dubbed it the "Pale Blade", proof his whole plan was finally paying off. For once, he might be right.

Ra'jirr's been having nightmares over the past few days. He keeps muttering about a "Pale Lady" - one of those swamp women who steal children away at night, I think. To think some fool story could turn the toughest bandit I know into a cowering kitten, frightened of his own shadow. I'm just glad none of the others see him like this.

It's getting worse. Ra'jirr can barely sleep at all now, and whenever he dozes off, he wakes up screaming - woke the whole place last night. He says the "Pale Lady" is coming for us - she's down in the forest, we have to return the sword or she'll kill us all. Not a chance - the boss clings to that thing like he was born with it. I've told everyone Ra'jirr just has a fever, but this can't go on. I've pulled a few things together. I'll slip out tonight and never look back.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Glover Mallory. I am a Breton man, and a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Castle Karstaag is a location. Castle Karstaag is the home of Rieklings. Esmond Tyne is present in Castle Karstaag. Esmond Tyne is a Breton man. 
Eager to make some coin, eh? That's the spirit. I'll tell you what. The Guild's got a problem out here that I've been trying to deal with for years, but haven't been able to handle.
A fellow Breton who went by the name Esmond Tyne showed up on my doorstep about a fortnight ago. He stole something from me: my own formula for improved bonemold. Took me years to perfect.
Before he ran off, he was talking some nonsense about trying to fence goods to the Rieklings at Castle Karstaag. I told him he was crazy to even think about talking to those vicious little buggers, but he wouldn't listen. I'd bet a fat purse of coin that he's either dead or hiding out up there.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a mage. Nchardak is a location. Nchardak is a Dwemer ruin. 
I know where to find the Black Book connected with Miraak. I haven't been able to get it, though. But maybe together we can unlock the secrets the Dwemer left behind.
Forbidden knowledge was somewhat a specialty of the ancient Dwemer. It seems they discovered this book and took it to study. I have found their "reading room" in the ruins of Nchardak. The book is there, but it's sealed in a protective case which I wasn't able to open.
But perhaps the two of us together will be able to get the book. To Nchardak, then. Follow me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Esbern. I am a member of the Blades. 
I'm afraid there's a problem. A serious one. I've discovered who the Greybeards' leader really is.
He's a dragon. Not just any dragon, but the right hand of Alduin, responsible for many atrocities during the ancient Dragon War. It's true that his crimes are long in the past, but justice does not count the passage of years.
Justice demands that he, Paarthurnax, dies for his crimes. Until he is dead, I'm afraid my oath as a Blade prevents me from offering you aid and comfort.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Drevis Neloren. I am a mage. College of Winterhold is a location. Drevis Neloren is present in College of Winterhold.  is a location. 
There may be a matter in which your... skills... could be useful. The various points of focus for magic energies around the College have become polluted, and need cleansing.
As you may be aware, the College has gone to great lengths to purify and enhance the natural energies of the world. This both enhances our connection to the realm of magic, and eliminates possible interference from outside sources. These energies, on occasion, become... polluted. Effort must be made to see that they are kept pure, clean.
These specially enchanted gloves will allow you to delve directly into the focal points for these energies. Go to each focal point and remove whatever impurities you may find there. Return the gloves to me when you have finished. Please exercise caution. This is not a procedure without possible... consequences.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Onmund. I am a man the player knows. 
I need your help with something. Something private.
I may have entered into an... agreement with Enthir. He had something I needed, so I traded him something of mine.
It was a mistake, and now I want back what I gave him. It's an amulet that belonged to my family, and I never should've given it to Enthir. But he won't deal with me. Talk to him; see what it'll take to get my amulet back.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province. Stone of Barenziah, Stones of Barenziah is an object. Stone of Barenziah, Stones of Barenziah is gem stones that were pried off of Barenziah's ceremonial crown by a thief in order to cover his tracks. 
Been a while since I've seen one of those. What you've got there is a Stone of Barenziah. The stone was pried off of Barenziah's ceremonial crown by a thief in order to cover his tracks.
I think there were twenty-four in all; supposedly, all of them are in Skyrim. Most people keep them as a curiosity. Some of the Guild members have tried to locate them over the years, but they haven't been successful... well, until now.
I only buy things I can turn around quickly for a profit. And no one wants those stones unless they have the whole set. Tell you what, if you find the rest of them, talk to me again. Otherwise, keep it and maybe it'll bring you luck.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Angeline Morrard. I am a worried mother. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. 
You're a traveler, correct? Have you been to Whiterun?
My daughter, Fura, was assigned to Whiterun after she joined the Imperial Army. I was hoping you might have met her. I haven't heard from her lately. I've tried talking to Captain Aldis but he hasn't been any help.
It would be very sweet of you to get more information about my daughter. Anything you can find out from Captain Aldis would be welcome news.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Calcelmo. I am a stressful man, and the most recognized scholar on the Dwemer in all of Tamriel. Nchuand-Zel is a location. Nchuand-Zel is Calcelmo's excavation site. Nimhe, Poisoned One are a giant, poisonous spider. Nimhe, Poisoned One are enemies. 
You idiot. Do you even know who I am? The most recognized scholar on the Dwemer in all of Tamriel, and you people keep bothering me!
I... I'm sorry I... I got too excited. I'm in the middle of some very... stressful work, and I shouldn't have yelled. How can I help you?
You want to access my Dwemer museum? It's a private place where I can catalog my research. Occasionally, the nobles will come in and have questions, but that's thankfully rare.
I'll let you in if you agree to something for me. There's a giant spider in Nchuand-Zel, my excavation site. My workers call her 'Nimhe', the Poisoned One. If you deal with Nimhe, I'll let you into both the excavation site and my Dwemer Museum. What do you say?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kesh the Clean. I am a worshiper of Peryite. 
Not everyone has the stomach required to entreat my Lord. He is the pus in the wound. Oh, proper ones curl their noses, but it's pus that drinks foul humors and restores the blood. But Kesh likes you, friend.
There is a way Peryite may speak to us who will take Him in. If you wish to commune with Him, we'll need the incense. Fetch for me a deathbell flower, one silver ingot, a flawless ruby, and some vampire dust. Then I will show you how.
How to gather the ingredients? This one would try a shop. You might prefer the direct route, hm? Deathbell grow in the frozen tundra. You might nip into a mine for the ruby and silver. Vampire Dust is tricky. Vampires, you know.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Peryite. I am the god of infection and pestilence. Bthardamz is a location. Bthardamz is a ruin. Orchendor is present in Bthardamz. Orchendor is Peryite's male elven monk. 
I have watched you for some time, you know. The decisions you've made intrigue me, and I wonder if you are the proper agent for a task of mine.
I sent a blessing to the world, a wasting plague that infected a scattering of Breton villages. One of my monks, the elf Orchendor, was sent to gather these Afflicted. He shepherded them into Bthardamz for me, but has since lost his way.
I will not stand for betrayal. I want you to go to Bthardamz and kill Orchendor, in my name. I can grant you a powerful token for this task. An escutcheon of dwarven make, capable of shielding you from both the spell and sword. Return when the elf lies dead and it will be yours.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sam Guevenne. I am a friendly man. 
You look like someone who can hold their liquor. How about a friendly contest to win a staff?
Ha! So you think that I don't have a chance against you. We'll see about that. This is a special brew, very strong stuff. Let's get started.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Senna. I am an angry priestess of Dibella. Temple of Dibella is a location. Senna is present in Temple of Dibella. Temple of Dibella is a location. Temple of Dibella is a temple to Dibella. 
Wake up! That's right, it's time to wake up, you drunken blasphemer!
Of course! You don't remember getting here. I'm guessing you also don't remember coming in here and blathering incoherently about marriage or a goat. Which means you don't remember losing your temper and throwing trash all over the temple.
You want to know where your friend Sam has gone? Dibella teaches love and compassion, but that doesn't mean we're just going to tell you what you want to know and let you walk away from this. Pick up your mess, then apologize, and if we think you're sincere we'll consider lending you aid.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Madanach. I am a Forsworn man, and a prisoner who tried to have the player killed in the past. Cidhna Mine is a location. Madanach is present in Cidhna Mine. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Cidhna Mine is a location. Cidhna Mine is a prison mine. 
Well, well. Look at you. The authorities of Markarth have turned you into an animal. A wild beast caged up and left to go mad.
So, my fellow beast, what do you want? Answers about the Forsworn? Revenge for trying to have you killed? You're one of us now, you see? A slave. The boot of the false, unjust law stepping on your throat. Maybe if you understood that, I could help you.
There's a man named Braig inside these mines. Besides me, he's been here the longest. Tell him I sent you. Ask him why he's here. I want you to know how widespread the injustice of Markarth is. Then, we might discuss about an early pardon.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Mogrul. I am a money-lender. septims is an object. septims is a currency. 
It seems you've inherited a problem. Drovas Relvi owes me 1,000 septims. At least he did until you set him up with that powerful wizard. Now he's untouchable. The way I figure it, it's your fault he can't pay me. So I guess I'm going to have to collect it from you.
And if you don't pay me? Nothing for now. But watch your back. I'll be sending collectors to find you. They won't ask so nicely. One way or the other, I'll get my money.
When you are tired of looking over your shoulder, you'll pay me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's guildleader in the Dark Brotherhood. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. The Hag's Cure is a location. The Hag's Cure is an apothecary in Markarth. Muiri is present in The Hag's Cure. Muiri is the apothecary's female assistant. Black Sacrament is an object. Black Sacrament is a ritual to employ the services of the Dark Brotherhood. 
Ah, there you are. We've got some business to discuss.
You must go to the city of Markarth, and speak with the apothecary's assistant. You'll probably find her in the shop, The Hag's Cure. The girl's been running her mouth, wants an ex-lover killed. She's apparently performed the Black Sacrament. Her name is Muiri. I need you to talk to her, set up the contract, and carry it out.
Just do whatever the contact wishes. Be professional, represent us well, and get the job done. Since it's your first contract, I'll let you keep whatever Muiri pays. She'll be generous, I'm sure. They always are.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Valdr. I am a hunter from Falkreath. outside Moss Mother Cavern is a location. Valdr is present in outside Moss Mother Cavern. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a town. Moss Mother Cavern is a location. Moss Mother Cavern is a dangerous cave. Ari is present in Moss Mother Cavern. Ari is Valdr's dead hunter friend, a woman. Niels is present in Moss Mother Cavern. Niels is Valdr's dead hunter friend, a man. Spriggans are hostile beasts. Spriggans are enemies. 
Name's Valdr. I hunt out of Falkreath.
We tracked a bear to this den, Moss Mother Cavern. Good coin for those pelts. We had the big sow cornered when they showed up. Three of them, out of nowhere. Spriggans.
Niels went down before we even knew to run. Ari died just inside. I never even thought the things were real. But now what? I can't just walk away. Not with my friends' bodies in there, being torn apart by those beasts.
You would help me clear out the Spriggans? You'd do that for a stranger? I don't know what to say. Lead on, I suppose.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Deor Woodcutter. I am a Skaal man in a bad mood. Stalhrim is an object. Stalhrim is a strange metal. 
I am in no mood to talk, outsider. One of the Skaal has gone missing. It is Baldor Iron-Shaper. As our only smith, Baldor is very important to the village.
Baldor is the keeper of an ancient tradition, the forging of Stalhrim. It is an art we Skaal hold sacred. If someone wanted to make such weapons, they would have to get that knowledge from Baldor.
I did see something in the woods on the day he disappeared. I saw two elves in the far distance, dragging something behind them. Hunters often visit our lands, so I thought little of it.
The elves went south and west. If your road takes you that way, perhaps you could search for any sign of Baldor. The Skaal would be grateful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Christer. I am a distressed husband. Mistwatch is a location. Christer is present in Mistwatch. Mistwatch is a location. Mistwatch is a tower hosting a bandit hideout. 
Please, stranger! I need your help! Divine mercy - you aren't one of the bandits. Please, you've got to help me!
It's my wife, Fjola! I think she's being held in this tower. Let me explain. Fjola, my wife, left the farm on errands and never came back. It's been months, and I've been searching for her since. I heard a rumor that these bandits were ransoming captives, so I thought she may be here. I managed to sneak past the guards and get this far, but... I don't think I can go on. I'm no warrior! Please, can you look for her?
I don't have much, but I can give you some coin for the trouble. One of the guards dropped this key while I hid. I wager it will come in handy for you. Please hurry!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Filnjar. I am an aggregated miner. Redbelly Mine is a location. Redbelly Mine is a mine. 
Sorry, the Redbelly Mine's dry right now. What's wrong with the mine, you might ask. It's full of spiders, that's what's wrong with it!
Almost killed Grogmar and me when they showed up. I'm worried that they'll come out of the mine looking for food soon... then we're in even bigger trouble.
You'd  clear them out for us? Tell you what. Keep to your word, and I'll line your pockets with as much as I can scrape up.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Fralia Gray-Mane. I am a distressed mother.  is a location. 
All I can think about is my son, my Thorald... they say that he was killed, but I know better. I know my son is alive! Those Battle-Borns... they're in with the Imperials. They know it too, and yet they lie to my very face!
It's not wise to discuss how I know about their lies here. Please, if you truly wish to help, meet me at my home. I'll tell you the whole story.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ulfric. I am the player's leader in the Stormcloaks, a man. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Balgruuf the Greater is present in Whiterun. Balgruuf the Greater is the Jarl of Whiterun, a man who has stayed neutral in the war between the Stormcloaks and the Empire. 
I'm glad you're here. I have a message I need delivered to the Jarl of Whiterun. Deliver this axe to Balgruuf the Greater.
Men who understand each other often have no need for words. There are but a few simple truths behind one warrior giving another his axe. Balgruuf will know my meaning.
Give the man my axe. If he keeps it, I will bide my time. If he returns it to you, it means war.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dervenin. I am a man who has been abandoned by his master. Pelagius Wing is a location. Pelagius Wing is a forbidden wing of the Blue Palace. Blue Palace is a location. Blue Palace is the large palace of the local ruler. Una is present in Blue Palace. Una is a maid. Erdi is present in Blue Palace. Erdi is a maid. 
My master has abandoned me! Abandoned his people. And nothing I say can change his mind. Now he refuses to even see me. He says I interrupt his vacation! It's been so many years... Won't you please help?
Without his guidance, our homeland is falling apart. North wages war against the south! We need his return. Oh, but... I'm sure he'll repay you when he comes to his senses! His favor is a powerful, powerful thing. And so very worth any... inconveniences.
Last I saw him, he was visiting a friend in the Blue Palace. But no one as mundane as the local ruler. No, no... such people are below him. No, he went into the forbidden wing of the palace, to speak with an old friend. Said it had been ages since they had last had tea. Oh and you'll need the hip bone... it's very important. No entering Pelagius Wing without that.
The doors to the Pelagius Wing are locked. But I hear the maids, Una and Erdi, know how to enter it for cleaning. Surely they can help for such an important matter?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am General Tullius. I am the player's leader in the Imperial Legion. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Jarl Baalgruf is present in Whiterun. Jarl Baalgruf is the nobleman who rules over Whiterun. 
I need someone I can trust to deliver a message of great import to Jarl Baalgruf of Whiterun.
We have it on good authority that Ulfric has raised enough men to attack the city of Whiterun. The Jarl, however, refuses the Legion's support. This missive should convince him.
Be aware soldier, these documents contain sensitive intelligence for the Jarl's eyes only.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brynjolf. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. The Ragged Flagon is a location. The Ragged Flagon is a bar that is actually a front to the Thieves Guild. Whiterun is a location. Delvin Mallory, Vex is present in Whiterun. Delvin Mallory, Vex is fellow members of the Thieves Guild who can give the player extra jobs. Tonilia is present in The Ragged Flagon. Tonilia is a female member of the Thieves Guild. 
Welcome to the family, kid. I'm expecting you to make us a lot of coin, so don't disappoint me.
This is how you get your cut of the spoils. Do as you're told and keep your blade clean. We can't turn a profit by killing.
You should talk with Delvin Mallory and Vex. They know their way around this place and they'll be able to kick some extra jobs your way.
Oh, and talk to Tonilia in the Flagon... she'll set you up with your new armor.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Falk Firebeard. I am the Jarl's steward. Wolfskull Cave is a location. Wolfskull Cave is a cave that is said to be haunted because of Potema the Wolf Queen's necromantic rituals some 500 years ago. 
There have been reports of weird happenings near Wolfskull Cave. Travelers disappearing, odd lights. I suspect wild animals or perhaps bandits.
The cave has a bad history. Long ago, Potema the Wolf Queen used it for necromantic rituals. That's where it got the name. That was over 500 years ago. Nothing much down there now - but everyone's always convinced the cave is haunted.
I don't think it's worth our time with the war going on, but if you want to clear out the cave, I'll make sure you're repaid for your work.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Captain Veleth. I am the commander of the Redoran Guard. an old farm is a location. Captain Veleth is present in an old farm. Raven Rock is a location. Raven Rock is a town ruled by the Redoran.  is a location. 
Thanks... I wasn't sure I'd make it off this farm alive. I wish I could have said the same for my man here.
Some of the Redoran Guard have taken to calling them "ash spawn". Me? I don't care what they're called... all I know is they're a danger to Raven Rock and they need to be stopped.
I was going to search for clues that might lead me to wherever they're coming from. I know it isn't the best place to start, but we know they've been coming from this direction.
Could you lend me a hand? We were searching the farm when the ash spawn ambushed us. Have a look around and see if you can turn up anything useful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sibbi Black-Briar. I am a pompous, womanizing nobleman, one of the Black-Briars. Riften jail is a location. Sibbi Black-Briar is present in Riften jail. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. 
Look, we all have our flaws; mine is that women can't get enough of me. So I had this little affair going on while I was betrothed to a beautiful girl named Svidi. Well, she finds out and she tells her brother, Wulfur. Then her brother attacks me with a knife... I mean, I had to defend myself!
So I got arrested for his murder. And now I have to stare at these bars for eight months. Can you believe it? I was about to let that wench Svidi marry into the richest family in Riften, and this is how she repays me. I'd do anything to have that whore's head on a platter. All I need to know is where she is.
Find her and I promise you'll be well compensated. Svidi was a young woman... buxom, with long flowing black hair. She used to sing the most lovely songs to me when we were courting. I've never heard a voice so beautiful.
All that talent will go to waste when I'm finished with her.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Faendal. I am a worker at the Riverwood mill who dislikes Sven. Riverwood is a location. Faendal is present in Riverwood. Riverwood is a location. Riverwood is a village. Camilla Valerius is present in Riverwood. Camilla Valerius is an intelligent, beautiful woman. Sven is present in Riverwood. Sven is a male Nord bard and a worker at the Riverwood mill, who is courting Camilla Valerius. 
Sven is a bard, so he says. Occasionally he finds time to do his job here at the mill. Thinks his ballads and sonnets are going to convince Camilla Valerius to marry him. As if she would say "yes".
An intelligent, beautiful woman like her wouldn't fall for that nonsense... I hope. I've been thinking... maybe Camilla needs a little help seeing Sven for what he is. Could you... could you give her this letter, and say it's from Sven? I think I've matched that Nord's lack of cleverness perfectly.
I would appreciate your help. You could take some gold I've saved up from working at the mill.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brynjolf. I am the player's superior in the Thieves Guild. Goldenglow Estate is a location. Goldenglow Estate is a bee farm. Aringoth is present in Goldenglow Estate. Aringoth is an arrogant wood elf man who owns the Goldenglow Estate. 
Goldenglow Estate is a bee farm; they raise the wretched little things for honey. It's owned by some smart-mouth wood elf named Aringoth.
We had an arrangement with Maven. We kept an eye on Goldenglow Estate to make sure the honey kept flowing. In return, Maven allowed us to extort Aringoth and bring in a huge payout.
Goldenglow Estate brought in a mountain of gold for the Guild. You could almost call it our sweetest deal. Then out of the clear blue, Aringoth stops sending us our cut. Mercer was... well, angry to put it kindly.
We need you to teach Aringoth a lesson by burning down three of the estate's hives and clearing out the safe in the main house. The catch is that you can't burn the whole place to the ground. Maven would be furious if you did. She also prefers that Aringoth remains alive, but if he tries to stop you from getting the job done, kill him.
The Guild has a lot riding on this. Don't make me look foolish by mucking it up.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. 
I've finally found you! I want to join the College of Winterhold. But I need help with my wards. Can you teach me?
So, first, you raise your ward and I'll throw a little spell at it. That way I can see the 'right' way to do things.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tharstan. I am a historian. Solstheim is a location. Tharstan is present in Solstheim. Vahlok's Tomb is a location. Vahlok's Tomb is an old, undiscovered tomb. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island that is covered with ancient ruins. Red Mountain is a location. Red Mountain is an active volcano.  is a location. 
Yes, I think you're just the adventurous sort I need. I have a job offer for you.
As a scholar of history, I've always found Solstheim to be most intriguing. I've made many forays into the ancient ruins that cover the island. I've come to know those ruins so well, I could draw you a map from memory. That's why I noticed the new passage the moment I laid eyes on it.
it leads to an old tomb, I think. It must have been opened by an earthquake that accompanied one of the Red Mountain's eruptions. I'd love to have a closer look, but those old ruins can be dangerous and I'm no adventurer. I'll pay you to watch my back down there.
I'll be heading back there soon. If you're interested, meet me at the ruins and we'll see what we can find. Now I'm off to pack for the expedition!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard. Benkongerike is a location. Benkongerike is a ruin. Black Books is an object. Black Books is books created by Hermaeus Mora, each containing forbidden knowledge. 
Yes. Hermaeus Mora is devious, but then so am I. Now, it's only a rumor of a whisper of a conjecture. But I think this is the place. Benkongerike. One of the Books is hidden there.
Now, hurry and find that Black Book. That Book might contain the final secrets of Xarxes, for all we know. I'll just make a copy for myself. It's far too dangerous to carry the real Black Book around.
Of course, I'm sure you can handle yourself. Of course you can. You can keep the original Black Book.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Lisbet. I am a struggling merchant. Lisbet's store is a location. Lisbet is present in Lisbet's store. Broken Tower Redoubt is a location. Broken Tower Redoubt is a Forsworn camp. 
This store would finally be on its feet if I hadn't lost my last shipment to Forsworn attacks. A specially-made Dibella statuette.
You aren't for hire, are you? A sellsword? I'll pay you if you can recover that statuette from the Forsworn at Broken Tower Redoubt.
I'll have a sum of gold waiting for you when you return.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Jaree-Ra. I am a treasure hunter. Solitude Docks is a location. Jaree-Ra is present in Solitude Docks. Icerunner is a location. Icerunner is a cargo ship. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Solitude Lighthouse is a location. Solitude Lighthouse is a lighthouse in Solitude. Solitude Docks is a location. Solitude Docks is the docks in Solitude. 
It's easy to find things to sell. Things nobody will miss. Things from underground, or just left lying around in someone's house. I bet the two of us, we're very alike. So why not take the next step? We can help each other.
My sister Deeja and I are treasure hunters. You could be too. We like to collect things. We are not thieves. We just take what will not be missed. What no one needs anymore. Maybe we take some weapons and stop a few deaths. Who would call that thievery?
With the war, many more ships come through these docks. Loaded with weapons and pay, but few people. And they pass through dangerous waters. We have an interest in one of those boats, the Icerunner. The Solitude Lighthouse will be guiding it in... but if its fire were to go out, the Icerunner would run aground.
If someone were to put out the lighthouse fire and then meet me on the docks afterwards... I could certainly direct them to that loot. That someone could be you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Wilhelm. I am an innkeeper. Ivarstead is a location. Wilhelm is present in Ivarstead. Ivarstead is a location. Ivarstead is a town. Shroud Hearth Barrow is a location. Shroud Hearth Barrow is a haunted barrow on the east side of Ivarstead. 
If I were you, I'd keep away from the barrow on the east side of town...
There ain't much more to tell... it's haunted and you should stay away. Look, I've seen one of the spirits with my very own eyes. When it glared at me, I swear it burned right through my soul.
Fortunately, the spirits seem to be sticking to the barrow. I think they're guarding it. Certainly isn't helping my business any; who'd want to rent a room anywhere near a haunted barrow?
If you think there's anything you can do, be my guest. About a year or two ago, some fella named Wyndelius came through; said he was some kind of a treasure hunter. I warned him not to go in there, just like I warned you. The very next night we heard screams from the barrow, and that was it. We never saw him again.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Olava the Feeble. I am a seer. Deepwood Redoubt is a location. Deepwood Redoubt is a camp. Hag's End is a location. Hag's End is a ruin far to the northeast of Deepwood Redoubt. 
Come to Olava for a reading, did you? Hmph. Yes. Yes, I surely can give you a reading.
It's not something I do lightly, mind you, and it's not as specific as you might want. But yes. I will do this for you. Please, relax. Free your mind. Yes, that's it...
A potential for adventure, and wealth. It is a ruin, ripe for the plunder. Deepwood Redoubt. Far to the northwest... Through there is... Hag's End. The last resting place of an assassin of old. A dark brother, who bequeaths his ancient earthly possessions... to you.
No... no, that is all. Now... now please. I find myself very weary all of sudden.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Froki. I am a worshiper of Kyne. Kyne's Sacred Trials is an object. Kyne's Sacred Trials is an ancient tradition, and a test to prove yourself to Kyne. 
The Divines are stolen idols! Impostor gods, sold by silver tongues. No thank you. Froki will not forget Kyne, or her Sacred Trials.
Kyne's Sacred Trials is an old tradition, a test to prove your worth in the eyes of Kyne. Show that you're a hunter and no simple butcher. Kyne teaches us to respect the beasts and blesses the hunter who will face their champions. True hunters are those who survive the Trials.
Do you think you're strong enough for Kyne's blessing? I would be glad to pass this tradition down. You must defeat guardian beasts, blessed by Kyne. I'll anoint you with the symbol of the wolf, the crab and the skeever. This will compel the guardian to appear when you reach his lair.
Return when you've defeated the guardian wolf, crab and skeever.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sybille Stentor. I am a rude court mage. Pinemoon Cave is a location. Pinemoon Cave is a cave. 
I'm busy, and I don't like being bothered unless I'm expecting something from you. Oh, don't give me that look. Fine. I supposed I can find some menial task to set your mind on.
Hmm.... We have something of a vampire problem. Bodies have been found with blood drained. I know of a den nearby you can wipe out as a precaution. Pinemoon Cave. I don't expect you to be capable of even that. Vampires are clever hunters. More clever than you, definitely.
I suppose I could show you a little about Illusion magic for free, couldn't I?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Skald the Elder. I am the nobleman who rules over the Pale. Dawnstar is a location. Skald the Elder is present in Dawnstar. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is the capital city of the Pale. Pale is a location. Pale is a region. 
Giants are a common problem in the Pale. The Empire always demanded I leave them be, but the Empire isn't here now.
Go and slay one of the beasts. It should let them know that Dawnstar is not to be trifled with. I'm counting on you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Idgrod Ravencrone. I am the noblewoman who rules over Morthal. Morthal is a location. Idgrod Ravencrone is present in Morthal. Morthal is a location. Morthal is a city.  is a location. Hroggar is present in Morthal. Hroggar is a man who lusts after Alva. Alva is present in Morthal. Alva is a woman. 
I want you to look into Hroggar's house fire. He lost his wife and daughter in the blaze. My people believe the house to be cursed now. Who am I to gainsay them?
How the fire started? Hroggar blames his wife for spilling bear fat in the fire. Many folk think he set the fire himself. Lust can make a man do the unthinkable. The ashes were still warm when he pledged himself to to a woman named Alva.
I can't arrest Hroggar on rumor and gossip. But you, a stranger, might find the truth for us. Sift through the ashes at Hroggar's house that others are too fearful to touch. See what they tell you.
Should you prove him guilty or innocent, I will reward you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Siddgeir. I am a corrupt nobleman who rules over Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Siddgeir is present in Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a city. Embershard Mine is a location. Embershard Mine is a mine. 
You've proven reliable. There's a group of bandits in my hold that I... may have had a few discreet dealings with.
The cut they were giving me was good at first, but now it's time to clean things up. Go to Embershard Mine and take care of them. Teach them to stop paying me. Execute every last bandit. Spare no one.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Igmund. I am an honorable nobleman who rules over Markarth. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Serpent's Bluff Redoubt is a location. Serpent's Bluff Redoubt is a Forsworn camp. 
Are you a sellsword? I don't like your kind. No honor. No loyalty. Unreliable. But I can't turn away a potential ally in these times. Let's see if you're better than a common mercenary.
My scouts have tracked down one of the Forsworn leaders, hiding out in their blood-soaked camps at Serpent's Bluff Redoubt. Deal with that Forsworn leader.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin who does not like the player very much. Ivarstead is a location. Ivarstead is a village.  is a location. Narfi is present in ruins just outside of Ivarstead. Narfi is a hapless beggar. 
Go assassinate Narfi. He's a hapless beggar living in some ruins just outside the village of Ivarstead. Easy even for you.
You get to slaughter an emaciated beggar in cold blood. You are truly an opponent to be feared. I'll have your payment waiting for you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Red Wave is a location. Red Wave is Safia's ship, in the Solitude docks. Safia is present in Red Wave. Safia is a ruthless female pirate captain who is deadly with a blade. 
I have an assassination contract for you: Safia, a pirate captain. She can be found aboard her ship, the Red Wave. It's currently docked at the Solitude docks.
Safia is a ruthless she-devil, by all accounts. Deadly with a blade. And let's not forget her crew - loyal and bloodthirsty, the lot of them.
This is my final contract, and certainly the most challenging. Be careful with this one, my friend. If you are capable of pulling through this, you've not only earned your payment, but my respect as well. And believe me, friend - that does not come easily.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Mzinchaleft is a location. Mzinchaleft is a dwarven ruin. Maluril is present in Mzinchaleft. Maluril is a dangerous, rogue male Dark Elf mage who studies dwarwen artifacts. 
I have another assassination contract for you: Maluril. He's dangerous. Very dangerous. A rogue Dark Elf mage doing research into dwarven artifacts should be both respected... and feared. Just not by you.
Maluril is doing his research in Mzinchaleft. A Dwarven ruin... what an exotic place for a kill. I hope the elf doesn't give you too much trouble. I once got set on fire by a sorcerer. Nasty business, that. But I digress.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin who dislikes bards. Morthal is a location. Morthal is a town in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Moorside Inn is a location. Moorside Inn is an inn in Morthal. Lurbuk is present in Moorside Inn. Lurbuk is the worst bard in Skyrim, a man. 
Your next assassination target is Lurbuk. He is staying at Moorside Inn in Morthal.
Lurbuk is, by all accounts, the worst bard in all of Skyrim. No one would hold it against you if you flayed that horrible bard alive and made a drum from his skin... Apparently so many people sought his death, a lottery had to be arranged to determine the client.
The only good bard is a dead one, as far as I'm concerned. All that singing and... mirth.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. 
Ma'randru-jo is an accomplished wizard, and your assassination target. Locating him may be challenging, as he travels with the caravans.
Those caravaners can be an elusive bunch. Takes a fair bit of stalking to take one down. But then, that's half the fun, isn't it?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a city. Helvard is present in Falkreath. Helvard is the male housecarl of the Jarl of Falkreath. Jarl is present in Falkreath. Jarl is the nobleman who rules over Falkreath. 
You are going on a little vacation in Falkreath. You'll be able to enjoy the sights, sample the food... and kill the housecarl, Helvard.
You know what that means? He's the bodyguard to the Jarl of Falkreath himself. So be careful. That's sure to throw a branch into Falkreath's well-oiled political machine.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Half-Moon Mill is a location. Half-Moon Mill is a mill ran by Hern and Hert. Hern is present in Half-Moon Mill. Hern is a male vampire who has blended into the human society. Hert is present in Half-Moon Mill. Hert is a female vampire, Hern's companion. 
You are going to assassinate Hern. He's a vampire, and has blended into human society for years. He's never far from his female companion, Hert. Also a vampire.
The contract is for the male, Hern. But you'll probably have to contend with the female, too. They both live in Half-Moon Mill. So for Sithis' sake, watch yourself.
Face a vampire, and live to tell the tale!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Anga's Mill is a location. Anga's Mill is a mill.  is a location. Ennodius Papius is present in in the woods near Anga's Mill. Ennodius Papius is a paranoid male hermit. 
Ennodius Papius lives just outside Anga's Mill, in the woods. He was once the miller. Now Papius is just a paranoid recluse who thinks someone is out to get him. And he's right.
You will assassinate him and prove his paranoia legitimate.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city.  is a location. Anoriath is present in the plains outside Whiterun. Anoriath is a male Wood Elf hunter who runs a market stall in Whiterun. 
There's Anoriath, a Wood Elf, who owns a market stall in the city of Whiterun.
He may run a stall in the city, but he retreats to the plains outside Whiterun to hunt. Kill him there, and no one will bear witness...
The hunter shall come to know the fear of the hunted, hmm? And I shall have your payment waiting for you, my friend.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a town. Hela's Folly is a location. Hela's Folly is a small waterlogged shipwreck northeast of Dawnstar. Deekus is present in Hela's Folly. Deekus is a male Argonian layabout, and a shipwreck scavenger. 
There's an assassination contract for you. You are to kill Deekus.
He is an Argonian layabout, likes to scavenge shipwrecks. My guess is he'll run if threatened. Or swim, if given the chance.
Personally, I've always found Argonians to be incredibly unpredictable opponents. Especially near water. Unfortunately, Deekus is at Hela's Folly, a small waterlogged shipwreck northeast of Dawnstar. Making him stay out of water will be difficult.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow assassin. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a mining town. Beitild is present in Dawnstar. Beitild is an angry and desperate female mine owner. 
Someone has contracted us to kill Beitild. She separated from her husband several months ago. Now the two run competing mining operations in Dawnstar. I hear the mining business is extremely cutthroat. And those hours... they're murder.
Beitild's angry and desperate. A fighter.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Galmar Stone-Fist. I am a Stormcloak leader. Serpentstone Isle is a location. Serpentstone Isle is a strange rock formation that attracts Ice Wraiths. 
The Stormcloaks need dedicated men and women who're devoted to the cause and willing to die for it. Before I can put you to use, I need to know how much you can take. I have a little test for you.
I'm sending you to Serpentstone Isle. If you survive, you pass. If you die, well, you weren't going to be much use to me anyway. It's where men have tested their mettle for ages. There's a strange rock formation, built by the ancients. Something about that place attracts the Ice Wraiths.
You kill an Ice Wraith out there, and I'll have all the proof I need about you being Stormcloak material.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Legate Rikke. I am a female leader in the Imperial Legion. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Fort Hraggstad is a location. Fort Hraggstad is a bandit fortress to be turned into an Imperial garrison. 
I've got a good feeling about you. And I don't often get good feelings about anything. A warrior knows to trust her gut... I'm not going to go through the normal process with you. I've got a little test lined up. Pass that, and we'll talk about you joining the Legion.
The ancients built many of the fortresses that dot the landscape of Skyrim. Sadly, most have fallen into disrepair. And nearly all have been overrun with bandits or other vagabonds. Fort Hraggstad is one of the few that remains mostly intact. We're going to install a garrison there, but first, you're going to clean out the bandits that have moved in.
Then, it's time for you to officially join the Legion.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Galmar Stone-Fist. I am the player's commanding officer in the Stormcloaks. Korvanjund is a location. Korvanjund is the tomb of King Borgas.  is a location. King Borgas is present in Korvanjund. King Borgas is a long-dead king. Jagged Crown is an object. Jagged Crown is a crown made from the bones and teeth of ancient dragons that symbolizes the power and might of a High King. 
I've found the final resting place of the Jagged Crown. Can you believe it? Well, I'm almost certain.
The High King always wore the Jagged Crown. It was the symbol of his might and power. The crown is made from the bones and teeth of ancient dragons, and it is said to contain a portion of the power of every king who has worn it. True or not, who would dare deny Ulfric's claim, when the legendary Jagged Crown sits upon his brow?
We're headed to Korvanjund. But, if old King Borgas is indeed buried there, we're bound to run into trouble of some kind. Your fellow Stormcloaks are already assembling outside the tomb. I'll meet you there as soon as I'm finished up here.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Legate Rikke. I am the player's commanding officer in the Imperial Legion. Korvanjund is a location. Korvanjund is a ruin.  is a location. Jagged Crown is an object. Jagged Crown is a powerful artifact. 
Ulfric's right-hand man, Galmar Stonefist, has located what he believes is the final resting place of the Jagged Crown. We're going to make sure he doesn't get his hands on it.
The rest of my men are already assembling outside Korvanjund. I'll meet you there as soon as I finish up here.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am J'zargo. I am a fellow mage student who is working hard on new spells. 
Can you... can you possibly help J'zargo? You must be very skilled with magic, yes? J'zargo is working hard, but cannot do it alone.
J'zargo has worked hard on learning new spells, trying new things. This will make J'zargo stand out as a mage. But J'zargo works so hard, there is no time to test these new spells.
If you help with the testing, this will make learning easier. J'zargo will give you scrolls, you will use them and report the results. This is a good plan, no? Let's see... this one, I think. J'zargo has designed it to be an excellent flame cloak, with a twist. It is especially potent against the undead, and should burn them to a crisp in no time. J'zargo gives you plenty of these scrolls, so you try them and return when you can say whether they work.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Geldis Sadri. I am a barkeep. Sadri's Sujamma is an object. Sadri's Sujamma is Geldis Sadri's special Sujamma. Sujamma is an object. Sujamma is an alcoholic beverage. 
The house specialty is the finest Sujamma to cross your lips, friend. My own personal formula that I call 'Sadri's Sujamma'.
In fact, I've just added some new ingredients to the mixture that I think makes it taste better than ever. All I need to do is get the word out that it's ready and they'll flock here for it.
Here, take these ten samples of the Sujamma and spread the word. If you get rid of all of them, there's something extra in it for you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aventus Aretino. I am a young orphan boy. Aretino Residence is a location. Aventus Aretino is present in Aretino Residence. Aretino Residence is a location. Aretino Residence is Aventus Aretino's home. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Honorhall Orphanage is a location. Honorhall Orphanage is an orphanage in Riften. Grelod the Kind is present in Honorhall Orphanage. Grelod the Kind is an evil, cruel woman, and the headmistress of Honorhall Orphanage. Black Sacrament is an object. Black Sacrament is a dark ritual used to employ the services of the Dark Brotherhood. 
I did the Black Sacrament, over and over. And then you came! An assassin from the Dark Brotherhood!
It took so long. So very long. But now that you're here, you can accept my contract. My mother, she... she died. I... I'm all alone now. So they sent me to that terrible orphanage in Riften. Honorhall. The headmistress is an evil, cruel woman. They call her Grelod the Kind. But she's not kind. She's terrible. To all of us. So I ran away, and came home. And performed the Black Sacrament.
And you can kill Grelod the Kind! I have a family heirloom you can have. Supposed to be sort of valuable. I hope that's all right.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Stalleo. I am a man who is expecting reinforcements. outside Treva's Watch is a location. Stalleo is present in outside Treva's Watch. Treva's Watch is a location. Treva's Watch is Stalleo's home fortress, overrun by bandits. 
Are you here to help? Finally, reinforcements have arrived. I was expecting more though, you'd better be good.
We left to help with the war and these filth bags swooped in and seized the place. I suspect Brurid planned this, there's been bad blood between us since the king's death. But to invade my home, kidnap my family...
The front gate is locked so you'll need to use the mine entrance behind us. Open the front gate and we'll try and give you some support. My family is everything to me. Clear the fort and on top of the posted reward you can have whatever items you'd like.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Alik'r Warriors. I am a group of Redguard warriors. Whiterun is a location. Alik'r Warriors is present in Whiterun. Hammerfell is a location. Hammerfell is the land of Redguards. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Rorikstead is a location. Rorikstead is a village. Saadia is present in Whiterun. Saadia is a Redguard woman, a fugitive from Hammerfell. 
You there. We are looking for someone in Whiterun, and will pay good money for information.
We're looking for a fugitive who comes from Hammerfell. A woman -- a foreigner in these lands. Redguard, like us. She is likely not using her true name. She may be somewhere in this city. We will pay for any information regarding her location. We are not welcome here in Whiterun, so we will be in Rorikstead if you learn anything.
Our reasons are none of your concern. All you need to know is that we're paying for information. If that doesn't interest you, feel free to walk away.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Olfrid Battle-Born. I am an elderly warrior. Whiterun is a location. Olfrid Battle-Born is present in Whiterun. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Dragonsreach is a location. Dragonsreach is the Jarl's palace in Whiterun.  is a location.  is a location. Arn is present in Whiterun. Arn is an old male warrior, and a close friend of Olfrid Battle-Born. 
You're here! And not a moment too soon. If anything should happen to Arn, there'll be hell to pay.
Arn's a close friend of mine. We fought together on the battlefield for many years until old age got the better of us. Now it's up to me to save him one more time... this time from the executioner's block in Solitude.
The city guard in Solitude is seeking Arn for a serious crime. When he fled here, he was arrested for drunken behavior. Can you imagine? Fortunately, his identity isn't known to the authorities in Whiterun, so there's still a chance to save him.
The job is two-fold. First, steal a letter that was sent from Solitude warning Whiterun's guard to be on the lookout for Arn. The second is to change Arn's name in the prison registry to his new identity.
The job is relatively difficult. If it was easy, I would have hired a local thug instead of a professional from the Thieves Guild. You see both of these items are kept inside Dragonsreach, and they don't allow visitors inside the Jarl's or the Steward's chambers.
One more thing. If you get caught, I can't afford to be connected to you. Remember that before you do anything stupid.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Drevis Neloren. I am the player's teacher in Illusion magic. College of Winterhold is a location. Drevis Neloren is present in College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college of mages. books, which contain powerful Illusion spells is an object. 
You have gone beyond my teachings, which is quite a feat. I did not think it possible. But there is always more to learn. I believe you are ready for the next step. Knowledge of truly powerful Illusion spells is here at the College, but it is hidden from those who might misuse it.
I shall teach you a spell to discern things hidden from others. With it, you will be able to acquire the texts you need. Bring all four to me, and I shall use them to inscribe the spells for you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Marise Aravel. I am a food vendor. Ancient's Ascent is a location. Ancient's Ascent is a dragon lair. ice wraith teeth is an object. 
I picked up a trick from a master butcher. He showed me a way to grind up ice wraith teeth and use it as a preservative. Keeps everything cold and fresh, but only for a limited time.
I'm always looking to replenish my supply, so if you ever come across five of them, I'd be more than happy to take them off your hands. The last traveler that traded me some said he found them at a place called Ancient's Ascent.
Careful though, rumor has it a dragon makes its home there.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Wylandriah. I am an absent-minded mage. Ivarstead is a location. Ivarstead is a town. Winterhold is a location. Winterhold is a city. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. Fellstar Farm is a location. Fellstar Farm is Boti's house in Ivarstead. Frozen Hearth Inn is a location. Frozen Hearth Inn is an inn in Winterhold. The White Phial is a location. The White Phial is an alchemy shop in Windhelm. Boti is present in Fellstar Farm. Boti is Wylandriah's friend. Dwemer Spoon is an object. Dwemer Spoon is an item. Orichalcum Ingot is an object. Orichalcum Ingot is an item. Grand Soul Gem is an object. Grand Soul Gem is a gem. 
I could use some help with getting organized. An assistant perhaps? No, no, no. Maybe a familiar. No, too messy. Well, at any rate, organization is not my strong suit. Not at all. I need as much help as I can get.
In fact, if you could retrieve a few things for me, I could start on my next set of experiments. What I need is my Dwemer Spoon, my Orichalcum Ingot and my Grand Soul Gem. In fact, I could use them immediately.
Well... why are you still standing here? Oh, right. You need to know where they are! That would help. Let's see. Last time I used the Dwemer Spoon was at my dear friend Boti's house in Ivarstead... Fellstar Farm I believe it's called. The Orichalcum Ingot should still be in Winterhold at the Frozen Hearth Inn. I don't know why I didn't just take it with me. And last is the gem. I left that one in Windhelm at the White Phial alchemy shop. It was a good trade too. Ah well.
Bring those items back to me and I'll be happy to experiment on you. No, no... that isn't right. I'd be happy to reward you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sinding. I am a regretful werewolf prisoner. a prison is a location. Sinding is present in a prison.  is a location. Ring of Hircine is an object. Ring of Hircine is a ring that is supposed to control a werewolf's transformations, a relic of Hircine. 
Come to gawk at the monster?
A little girl is dead because of me. Believe me, it wasn't anything I ever intended to do. I just... lost control. I tried to tell them, but none of them believe me.
It's all on account of this blasted ring. This is the Ring of Hircine. I was told it could let me control my transformations. Perhaps it used to. But I'll never know. Hircine didn't care for my taking it, and threw a curse on it. I put it on... and the changes just came to me. I could never guess when. It would be at the worst times. Like... with the little girl.
I don't suppose there's a point in keeping the secret if I'm going to die in here anyway. I'm sure you've heard of men who shift to beasts under the influence of the moons. I am one of them. A werewolf. It's my secret, and my shame. That's why I wanted the ring... it was said to give men like me control. Now I may look like a man, but I still feel the animal inside of me, as strong as ever.
You would take the ring back to Hircine? Oh my. You would do this for me? Here, take it. I don't want anything to do with this wretched thing anymore. Seek out the beast. He wanders these woods. Bring him down and... well, the Lord of the Hunt should smile on you and appear before you.
I wish you luck, but should leave here while I still have my skin. Should our paths cross again, I will remember your kindness. Farewell.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tyranus. I am a member of the Vigil of Stendarr. outside the Abandoned House is a location. Tyranus is present in outside the Abandoned House. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. Abandoned House is a location. Abandoned House is a house in Markarth that might have been used for Daedra worship. 
Excuse me, but do you know anything about this house? Seen anyone enter or leave? Seems no one in this city has.
I'm with the Vigil of Stendarr. We believe this house might have been used for Daedra worship. Evil rites and so forth. I was actually just about to head on inside. Be good to have someone watch my back.
Follow me, and keep your eyes open. Daedra are powerful creatures and tricksters. Never know what you'll find.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Molag Bal, Lord of Domination. I am the evil god of domination. 
Fool! Did you think Molag Bal, the Lord of Domination, would so easily reward you? What do you see from that little cage? Speak.
You definitely see the spikes of your cage. Sharp, aren't they? This was the last thing many saw before they were sacrificed in my name. But even a god has his enemies, and my rival Boethiah had her priest desecrate it. So long since it's tasted blood. Until you came.
I want submission. I want the priest who did this to bend his knee and give me his soul. He comes by to perform Boethiah's insulting rites at my altar, but he's been missing. Captured and bound. Left to rot.
You'll get the freedom your kind enjoys so much. Save the priest. Let him perform his rite one more time. And when he does, we will be waiting for him.
Then you will be finally rewarded. The Mace of Molag Bal! I give you its true power, mortal. When your enemies lie broken and bloody before you, know that I will be watching.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nazir. I am a fellow member of the Dark Brotherhood. gold is an object. 
You disrespected the Dark Brotherhood. And it'll cost you. You want back into the Family, you pay the price. 500 gold, and all is forgiven.
I suggest you "collect" it. Until you pay the fine, you are effectively cut off from all Dark Brotherhood duties and contracts.
No contracts. No rewards. No respect.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Arngeir. I am one of the Greybeards. Ustengrav is a location. Ustengrav is an ancient fane. 
You are now ready for your last trial. Retrieve the Horn of Jurgen Windcaller, our founder, from his tomb in the ancient fane of Ustengrav.
Remain true to the Way of the Voice, and you will return. Then it is time for us to recognize you formally as Dragonborn.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farkas. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Erikur is present in Solitude. Erikur is a man who has been causing trouble to other citizens. 
We've gotten a letter about Erikur needing some muscle up in Solitude.
I don't know what the fight is about, and that's not our business anyway. I just need you to go out there, look tough, and scare this milk drinker Erikur into submission.
No more than that. I don't want to hear about a killing, understand? Go. Bring honor to yourself, and the Companions.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Urag gro-Shub. I am a librarian. College of Winterhold is a location. Urag gro-Shub is present in College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. Fellglow Keep is a location. Fellglow Keep is a summoner fortress. Orthorn is present in Fellglow Keep. Orthorn is an ex-student of the College of Winterhold. 
I know what you want. Word travels fast around here. Discovered some big mystery, huh? Well you don't even need to ask. No, I don't have anything for you. Not anymore, anyway.
Orthorn stole a number of books when he ran off to Fellglow Keep to join those Summoners. Some kind of peace offering. I think one of those volumes may have had some relevant information. If you want them, you'll have to talk to Orthorn.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Hilund. I am a warrior. Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Hilund is present in Thirsk Mead Hall. Thirsk Mead Hall is a location. Thirsk Mead Hall is a mead hall. 
To tell you the truth, I've been a little distracted. I've got this... idea.
I want to ring the whole hall with Rieklings' little spears. Mocking us, from the past. Making us work harder. Fight better. The only problem is, I'm going to need a lot of spears. A lot. So, if you could find a bunch of them for me, that would make it easier on me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. 
Every now and again, we like to remind the shopkeepers that we're in charge. If that means breaking into their strongboxes and stealing something valuable from them, then so be it.
Feel like doing a bit of shopping... the Guild way? The owner of this shop stiffed us on their last protection payment, but we're taking it anyway.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Wujeeta. I am a worker at the Riften Fishery, and a Skooma addict. Riften Fishery is a location. Riften Fishery is a fishery. Skooma is an object. Skooma is an illegal drug. 
My job at the Riften Fishery is in danger. The owner, Bolli, said that if I show up for work in this condition one more time, then I'm out.
I don't mean to do this to myself, but I can't help it. I tried some Skooma a year ago, and ever since then, I can't stop! If you could give me a healing potion, I could cleanse this poison from my body and get back to my life.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard. Solstheim is a location. Neloth is present in Solstheim. Red Mountain is a location. Red Mountain is an active volcano. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island. Heart Stones is an object. Heart Stones is magical stones. 
I'm running low on Heart Stones. If you have any with you, I'll buy one. Otherwise, I can tell you where you might find one.
Every time the Red Mountain belches, more of them land here on Solstheim. Look around for impact craters, exposed rock, that sort of thing. You may need to pick away at it to pry the heart stone itself loose, but you look... strong.
Good luck.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Hamal. I am the head priestess of Dibella. Karthwasten is a location. Karthwasten is a small village pressed against the stone, to the north. Exalted Protocol of the Dibellan Sybil is an object. Exalted Protocol of the Dibellan Sybil is a secret ceremony known to the priestesses of Dibella, which is used to find a new Sybil after the death of the previous one. 
You have committed a breach, and must pay the penalty. Normally, a quick death would be required. Luckily for you, there are more pressing matters.
The ceremony you so rudely interrupted was the Exalted Protocol of the Dibellan Sybil. I don't expect you to know what that means. Suffice to say that our Sybil was recently lost to us. Through the ceremony, we have seen the home of the next Sybil, to the north, in a small village pressed against the stone.
If you can travel there, and retrieve our young Sybil, your transgression will be forgiven. We believe the place in our vision to be Karthwasten. Now move quickly. The girl must be brought to the temple as soon as possible.
You, my dear, can earn the blessing of Dibella as your reward.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Elynea Mothren. I am Neloth's mycologist, and an old woman. Harstrad is a location. Harstrad is a river. taproots is an object. 
I don't care if he's a master wizard. He can't treat me like this! Master Neloth, that fetcher, told me to fix his house. If I don't, he'll find a new mycologist who will. Decades of loyal service, and he'd just throw me out like yesterday's breakfast!
I need three taproots soaked in the headwaters of the Harstrad river to fix Neloth's tower. I'm an old woman. I can't possibly make that trip. It's way too dangerous.
If you get some taproots, I'll pay you to dip them in the headwaters and bring them to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kjar. I am the harsh captain of the North Wind. North Wind is a location. North Wind is a ship. 
The North Wind is my mistress, and I'm her master. I don't tolerate any disloyalty. You looking for work? Got a sailor who thought running a gang of thieves would be more money than hauling my cargo.
You make an example of that gang, I'll give you a year's worth of pay.  Don't spend it all on mead.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Halbarn Iron-Fur. I am an old blacksmith. Ebony is an object. Ebony is an ore. Stalhrim is an object. Stalhrim is an ore. 
Cleaning out the forge was the easy part. But those blasted Rieklings made off with most of my materials. And I can't forge air.
You tend to wander around, don't you? If you come across any Stalhrim or Ebony in your travels, bring them back to old Halbarn. Help each other out.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Amaund Motierre. I am a man who has contracted the Dark Brotherhood to kill Titus Mede II. Skyrim is a location. Amaund Motierre is present in Skyrim. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city in Skyrim. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Katariah is a location. Katariah is Titus Mede II's ship, moored offshore in the Solitude inlet. onboard the Katariah is a location. Titus Mede II is present in onboard the Katariah. Titus Mede II is the Emperor. 
The Emperor is still in Skyrim, but not for long. He's onboard his ship, the Katariah, moored offshore in the Solitude inlet. But you must hurry!
If you can get onboard that ship. Kill Titus Mede II, as contracted... I will reveal the location of the dead drop that holds your payment.
This is the true Emperor, not some half-penny lookalike. He'll be surrounded by elite bodyguards, I'm sure. You'll have your work cut out for you. Still... everyone assumes the Dark Brotherhood has been completely destroyed. They may be a bit more lax than usual.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Temba Wide-Arm. I am a sawmill owner. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a wooded province. bear pelts is an object. 
Have you ever seen what a bear does to the trees? They jump up on their hind legs and scratch them to bits... marking their territory or something.
It's getting to the point where I have to scour Skyrim for untouched trees at the right size. Costs me too much time and money.
Tell you what. Bring me ten of bear pelts from anywhere in Skyrim I'll gladly pay you for thinning out the herd.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Mjoll the Lioness. I am a retired adventurer. Mzinchaleft is a location. Mzinchaleft is a Dwemer ruin, the home of a dangerous Dwemer colossus. Grimsever is an object. Grimsever is Mjoll the Lioness' beloved, lost sword. 
My blade, the Grimsever, was lost years ago in a Dwemer ruin. Without it, I feel almost as defenseless as a newborn. I don't think I'll ever be able to find a replacement.
I was adventuring in the depths of the ruins when I was attacked by a massive construct... like nothing I had ever seen. When the colossus struck, Grimsever was knocked from my grasp and I was wounded badly. It was only through blind luck that I was able to crawl away from the Dwemer abomination and make my way to the surface.
I couldn't ask you to undertake such a treacherous journey, it would be a fool's errand. But I see that spark in your eye and I know better than to warn you away. Grimsever rests with the Dwemer ruin of Mzinchaleft. Tread carefully, friend... those same ruins almost took my life.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Quaranir. I am a member of the Psijic Order. College of Winterhold is a location. Quaranir is present in College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. Augur of Dunlain is present in College of Winterhold. Augur of Dunlain is a wise, reclusive male wizard. Eye of Magnus is an object. Eye of Magnus is a dangerous object that radiates power, in the College of Winterhold. 
I've given us a chance to speak privately, but I'm afraid I can't do this for long. We must be brief.
The situation here at your College is of dire importance, and attempts to contact you as we have previously have failed. I believe it is due to the very source of our concern. This object... The Eye of Magnus as your people have taken to calling it. The energy coming from it has prevented us from reaching you with the visions you have already seen. The longer it remains here, the more dangerous the situation becomes. And so I have come here personally to tell you it must be dealt with.
I fear I have already overstepped the bounds of my Order, but I will offer this: seek out the Augur of Dunlain here in your College. His perception may be more coherent than ours.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Lucan Valerius. I am a shopkeeper. Lucan Valerius's shop in the town is a location. Lucan Valerius is present in Lucan Valerius's shop in the town. Bleak Falls Barrow is a location. Bleak Falls Barrow is a tomb northeast of town. 
We did have a bit of a... break-in. But we still have plenty to sell. Robbers were only after one thing. An ornament, solid gold. In the shape of a dragon's claw.
I've got some coin coming in from my last shipment. It's yours if you bring my claw back. If you're going after those thieves, you should head to Bleak Falls Barrow, northeast of town.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Beirand. I am an army blacksmith. 
I have just one question for you. Light, medium, or heavy?
Light armor for scouting detail, heavy armor for full on combat, or something in between?
Now, that'll be it. One free outfit per soldier. You lose that, or get it banged up, you'll need to pay like everyone else.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Hermaeus Mora, Gardener of Men. I am knower of the unknown, master of fates, an immortal god. Hermaeus Mora's realm is a location. Hermaeus Mora, Gardener of Men is present in Hermaeus Mora's realm. 
I am Hermaeus Mora, the Gardener of Men, knower of the unknown, master of fates. You stand in my realm, mortal.
You have sought out the forbidden knowledge that only one other has obtained. You are a seeker of knowledge and power, like Miraak before you.
The Skaal have withheld their secrets from me for many long years. The time has come for this knowledge to be added to my library. Convince them to give up their secrets. My word is as true as fate, as inevitable as destiny. Bring me what I want, and I will give you what you seek.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ghost of Old Hroldan. I am an ancient ghost of a soldier. Hroldan is a location. Ghost of Old Hroldan is present in Hroldan. Hroldan is a location. Hroldan is an ancient, sacked village. 
You don't remember me, Hjalti? Two campaigns we served together. You saved my life time and time again. You promised me, Hjalti. You promised that when we sacked Hroldan, you would make me your sworn brother.
And I've waited. Even after the enemies' arrows dug into my chest and their hammers crushed my bones. I've waited.
Give me your sword, Hjalti. That we may become brothers as you promised.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Talvas Fathryon. I am Neloth's fearful mage apprentice. Tel Mithryn is a location. Talvas Fathryon is present in Tel Mithryn. Tel Mithryn is a location. Tel Mithryn is a settlement. Neloth is present in Tel Mithryn. Neloth is a powerful male wizard. Ash Guardian are a powerful ash creature. Ash Guardian are enemies. 
You've got to help me! I conjured an Ash Guardian and now it's running amok in Tel Mithryn.
Master Neloth refused to teach me the Ash Guardian spell. So I read his spell book on my own and learned it. Something went wrong when I cast it. The creature is attacking everything in sight.
I need to keep Master Neloth distracted so he doesn't find out what I did. There is no telling what he would do to me. While you are taking care of the creature, I'll try to figure out what went wrong.
I don't have any gold to pay you with, but I can give you this staff.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Habd. I am a retired sailor, giving quest via "Habd's Journal". Hammerfell is a location. Hammerfell is a realm. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island. Frostflow Lighthouse is a location. Frostflow Lighthouse is an old lighthouse on an icy coast. "Habd's Journal" is an object. "Habd's Journal" is Habd's journal. 
Habd's Journal
by Habd

After years of sailing from Hammerfell to Solstheim and back, Ramati and I have finally saved enough money to buy that old light house we spotted on the coast and we are moving in next month.
These northerners really know how to live. It may be cold, but you can't beat the tranquility of the watching icebergs to live out your silver years. Ramati loves the place too, despite the occasional leaky ceiling. Mani and Sudi, unfortunately, seem miserable here; I know the kids are old enough to strike out on their own, but I hope they'll grow to love the peace and quiet here as I have.
Mani and Sudi continue to bicker and harass each other and they seem to have started in on their mother as well. Ramati keeps finding things missing from the cellar. Sudi said she heard a noise down there but Mani just thinks their mother is going mad from isolation. The very thought of it is ridiculous, she's always wanted to retire here!
Sudi keeps saying that she hears scratching coming from the cellar at night. I think she's just trying to get her mother's goat, but I'd better head into town to get a few traps just in case it's rats. Should only take a couple days. I just hope those two go easy on Ramati while I'm gone.
Oh gods. Oh gods why? I returned home to find my beautiful Ramati killed and this thing, this horrible bug-like creature ransacking our home. I managed to kill the damned thing, I think it might be a demon! I've never seen anything like it! Oh gods poor Ramati. It must have come out of the cellar. I'm going down there and locking the door behind me to make sure they don't escape. I don't know if I'll make it out, but I have to save my family!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Anonymous. I am an investigator from the College of Winterhold, giving quest via "Midden Incident Report". Midden is a location. Midden is a sewer system underneath the College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. Arcanaeum is a location. Arcanaeum is the library in the College of Winterhold. "Midden Incident Report" is an object. "Midden Incident Report" is a report. Deadric Relic is an object. Deadric Relic is a large, segmented sculpture of a gauntlet, with the Daedric sigil 'O' emblazoned upon the palm. rings is an object. 
Midden Incident Report
by Anonymous

The missing students were found in the Midden this morning. Dead, as expected. None of us bothered keeping a detect life charm for the search at this point.
The bodies were found together, each suffering the same deformities; peeled and bubbling skin on the arms and face. Conjurer's burn, as it's commonly referred to around the College. There's little doubt they were attempting a summoning ritual well beyond their capabilities.
The relic nearby put any doubt in this theory to rest. I admit that I've never seen one like it - a large, segmented sculpture of a gauntlet, the Daedric sigil 'O' emblazoned upon the palm. Attempts to move it were in vain. I must show it to the Archmage during his upcoming visit. Perhaps he will know more.
While we couldn't move the relic, I was able to pry four "rings" from it. I'm sure there's a connection between them and the ritual the students were attempting.
I'll store these in the Arcanaeum until we can consult with a conjuration master to learn more.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Stony Creek Cave is a location. Stony Creek Cave is a cave. Forgemaster's Fingers is an object. Forgemaster's Fingers is a pair of gauntlets. 
Halt, outlander. By the Code of Malacath, this stronghold belongs to the Orcs. Your kind are unwelcome. You're not an Orc, or Blood-Kin, so stay out. We only help our own.
Hmm... there is a way to become Blood-Kin, if you truly insist on entering our stronghold. We've heard whispers of an enchanted pair of gauntlets, hidden and protected by dangerous men, beasts, or worse.
They are called the Forgemaster's Fingers. Find them at Stony Creek Cave. Bring them to our chief, and he will decide if you're worthy to be Blood-Kin to the Orcs.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Gorm. I am the worried housecarl of Idgrod. Morthal is a location. Gorm is present in Morthal. Morthal is a location. Morthal is a town. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Idgrod is present in Morthal. Idgrod is the noblewoman who rules over Morthal, and a seer. Captain Aldis is present in Solitude. Captain Aldis is a male official. 
My mind weighs heavy enough. Idgrod's so lost in her visions, and it's only getting worse. I've looked after her safety for so long... If she can't tell what's real and what's not, how will she continue to lead Morthal?
There is a letter, one I have had for some time now. I think it is time it gets delivered. I cannot leave Idgrod's side, so I must stay here. Could you see that it reaches Captain Aldis in Solitude?
Please, do not open it. It is... private.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Grosta. I am an angry wife. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is a province inhabited by elves. Broken Helm Hollow is a location. Broken Helm Hollow is a camp east towards the border of Morrowind. Liefnarr is present in Broken Helm Hollow. Liefnarr is Grosta's missing husband. 
My husband Liefnarr said he was going east towards the border of Morrowind to trade some of our grain to some folks at Broken Helm Hollow.
I waited and waited, and he never came back. Probably shacked up with some elven whore. Good riddance to him I say. If I only knew where he was, I'd sure give him a piece of my mind.
If you see him, tell him Grosta said he can go straight to hell... he's not welcome here any more.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Daynas Valen. I am a historian, giving quest via "Daynas Valen's Notes". Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Folgunthur is a location. Folgunthur is the ancient barrows at the foot of Solitude. Saarthal is a location. Saarthal is ancient, shattered, half-buried crypts. Geirmund's Hall is a location. Geirmund's Hall is a tomb. "Daynas Valen's Notes" is an object. "Daynas Valen's Notes" is Daynas Valen's research notes. 
Daynas Valen's Notes
by Daynas Valen

How to summarize a lifetime of research? So little of what I have learned matters now - the petty politics of ancient times, the age-long campaign to wipe out all mention of the Gauldur name.
In the opening days of the First Era, the Archmage Gauldur was revered throughout the north. Wisdom, wealth, honor, and power were his, and even the legendary heros' heirs sought his counsel.
Smothered by his shadow, Gauldur's three sons grew cruel and resentful. They lusted after their father's power and prestige, and eventually Jyrik, the eldest, discovered its source: a mysterious amulet, from which he never parted. Together, they conspired to murder their father in his sleep and divide his amulet between them. And so it was done.
Consumed by their newfound power, the brothers laid waste to the surrounding villages. So great was the carnage that the High King himself intervened, sending a company of battlemages led by the Archmage Geirmund to subdue the brothers. And after a devastating battle, the three fled the field.
Mikrul, the youngest, was run to ground in Folgunthur, the ancient barrows at the foot of Solitude. Geirmund pursued Jyrik to the shattered crypts of Saarthal, half-buried even then. And at last, Sigdis was cornered in the southernmost reaches of land and later entombed in Geirmund's Hall.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Taarie. I am a tailor. Radiant Raiment is a location. Taarie is present in Radiant Raiment. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Radiant Raiment is a location. Radiant Raiment is a clothing store. Blue Palace is a location. Blue Palace is Elisif's palace. Elisif is present in Blue Palace. Elisif is the female Jarl of Solitude. 
You're really going to the Blue Palace? That presents an opportunity.
If you were willing to wear one of Radiant Raiment's outfits and speak to the Jarl I would not only pay you but let you keep the outfit.
Here's the outfit. Try to get Jarl Elisif's opinion on it and if she likes it mention it's from Radiant Raiment.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delvin Mallory. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. 
There are all sorts of people wandering around carryin' their valuables on their person... just waitin' for someone like you to pick their pocket. So, you in for a little fishin'?
One of our marks seems to have an item of value we want to add to our vault. Get it for us and you'll receive the usual pay. Sound good?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Inge Six Fingers. I am a bard. Bards College is a location. Bards College is a college for bards. Stony Creek Cave is a location. Stony Creek Cave is a bandit den. Finn's Lute is an object. Finn's Lute is Finn's original eight course lute. 
Hmm? Oh, sorry. My mind wanders sometimes. I was just thinking about Finn's Lute.
Over a year ago, thieves broke into the College and made off with a lot of valuable things. Mostly gold and silver. But they also stole Finn's Lute. We just learned where the bandits fled to, and I very much want that lute back. They are at Stony Creek Cave.
Finn was the bard who invented the eight course lute that is commonplace today. Until he found a way to string the extra courses, bards only had six course lutes. The lute they stole is Finn's original eight course lute. I doubt they even realize its true value.
There is no way I can pay you what this Lute is worth. But I can teach you a few tricks I've learned over the years.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Malborn. I am a nervous man. Windhelm is a location. Malborn is present in Windhelm. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is a land inhabited by the Dunmer.  is a location. Khajiit is present in around the main gate of Windhelm. Khajiit is a suspected male Thalmor assassin. 
Oh, it's you. I didn't expect to see you again.
I'm trying to stay alive. I think time's running out though. I'm pretty sure the Thalmor know where I am. Maybe you can help me.
I was trying to get to Morrowind. The Dunmer don't care much for the Thalmor and I figured I'd be safe there. As safe as anywhere, that is. But there's a Khajiit hanging around the main gate. I didn't like the way he was looking at me. I'm sure he's Thalmor. Just waiting for me to leave Windhelm so he can follow me and kill me in a lonely place.
You'd be saving my life. Again. I know I probably seemed ungrateful... I've just been so scared. Expecting a knife at my throat any minute.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Cindiri Arano. I am a noblewoman. Raven Rock is a location. Cindiri Arano is present in Raven Rock. Raven Rock is a location. Raven Rock is a town on Solstheim. Solstheim is a location. Solstheim is an island. First Edition is a location. First Edition is a famous bookshop far away from Solstheim. Strident Squall is a location. Strident Squall is a ship that sank off the coast of Solstheim, and turned into a reaver den. Folio is an object. Folio is a special book. 
A few months ago, I had sent an important Folio to the First Edition to be rebound. They sent it back to me recently, but it never arrived.
The Folio was aboard the "Strident Squall" or something like that. The damn thing sunk right off the coast of Solstheim. Can you imagine? One of the sailors survived. Poor thing crawled all the way to Raven Rock on his hands and knees. Before he died, he told the guard about the wreck and warned us that it was going to be crawling with reavers.
Could you find the Folio for me? You have no idea how much it hurts losing such a precious item!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Faralda. I am a mage gatekeeping the College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. Mage Light is an object. Mage Light is a useful alteration spell. 
It would seem that the College has what you seek. The question now is what you can offer the College.
Not just anyone is allowed inside. Those wishing to enter must show some degree of skill with magic. A small test, if you will.
The Mage Light spell is useful to any mage, not just those specializing in Alteration. Can you cast one on the seal on the ground?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Wulf Wild-Blood. I am a hunter, and a worried brother. 
In days past, my brother Torkild and I would share the hunt, but that was... long ago.
Torkild had a wild gleam in his eye, more than most. In my darkest times, I fear he fell in among the werebears of the glacier.
Werebears are twisted, cursed beasts. True bears are noble and great creatures of the wild. I've heard tell of men who, by curse or by heart's desire, become transformed into one of those vile things. It is a pitiable fate. And one that I fear has fallen to my brother.
If you happen to cross his path, be wary. He was a fierce warrior as a man. If he fell prey to his more bestial side, he could be deadly.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Crescius Caerellius. I am a stressed man. Raven Rock Mine is a location. Crescius Caerellius is present in Raven Rock Mine. Raven Rock is a location. Raven Rock is a struggling town. Raven Rock Mine is a location. Raven Rock Mine is a worthless and tainted mine in Raven Rock. 
Who in the blazes are you?! Can't you see I'm busy? Or, perhaps you could help me. Hmph, maybe. Been difficult trusting people lately, they think I'm crazy.
Mark my words, these mines hold a secret that could put Raven Rock back on the map. A secret the East Empire Company swept under the rug two centuries ago. It killed my great-grandfather, Gratian Caerellius, and left Raven Rock with a worthless and tainted mine.
East Empire Company called it "a terrible accident", claiming that he was lost in a rockfall, but I know better. My wife and I were cleaning out our home, and we came across some of my great-grandfather's things locked in an old chest. I found an unsent letter he'd written to the East Empire Company, and a key.
The letter describes a discovery that was made in the mine by some of the diggers. They wanted Gratian to take a closer look. The East Empire Company must have felt it was of great value, as they locked that section of the mine off from everyone else. I assume the key unlocks that section of the mine. I haven't been able to find the entrance.
I'm telling you... there's something big down there, something that the East Empire Company wanted to hide from everyone.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ingun Black-Briar. I am Elgrim's talented apprentice. deathbell is an object. deathbell is a rare alchemy ingredient. nightshade is an object. nightshade is a rare alchemy ingredient. nirnroot is an object. nirnroot is a rare alchemy ingredient. 
I'm aspiring to earn the title of an alchemist. However, the road ahead is paved with loose cobbles and deadly pitfalls.
Master Elgrim says I'm a natural; that I have a unique talent. But I fear his approval masks his intolerance for my mistakes. My errant formulas have cost Master Elgrim a fortune in ingredients; some of which are almost irreplaceable.
To restore Master Elgrim's supply I would need 20 deathbell, 20 nightshade and 20 nirnroot. Am I sensing that you may be interested in gathering these rare ingredients for me? That means more time for my experiments and less time in the field. Much appreciated.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Bralsa Drel. I am a former great miner who lost her job when the mine dried up. The Retching Netch is a location. The Retching Netch is a bar. Geldis is present in The Retching Netch. Geldis is a male barkeeper who owns the The Retching Netch. 
Doesn't everyone pity the hopeless? Look at me... I'm no better than a beggar.
I used to be a miner, a good one too. I made more gold digging up ore in a month than some people earn in a lifetime. When the mine dried up, I was lost. I have no other trade, so I spend my time drinking my fortune away at the Retching Netch... or I used to anyway.
That fetcher Geldis won't even allow me inside. Said I was bad for business. If I want to spend my last bag of coins getting drunk, that's my business. What does he care?
If you can get that stubborn mule to let me into the Netch, I'll make sure you get what's coming to you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Milore Ienth. I am an alchemist. a walled city is a location. Milore Ienth is present in a walled city. 
I'm proud to say that I grow or harvest most of my exotic ingredients myself.
I only wish I had a better source for Netch jelly. Those creatures are difficult to track down since it's so dangerous beyond the the town walls.
Could you gather some Netch jelly for me? That would be splendid! Five samples should be enough. I'd be more than happy to give you something for the effort.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Carlotta Valentia. I am an annoyed woman. Bannered Mare is a location. Bannered Mare is an inn. 
That bard Mikael is begging for a dagger up against his throat, the way he goes on about me.
I've heard him boasting at the Bannered Mare, saying he'll "conquer me as a true warrior conquers any harsh beast." Hmph.
You could try to convince that lute player to stop chasing me. If you want to try, go right ahead. I don't think anything will get through that thick skull of his, though.
If you do convince Mikael, I'd thank the gods, but I'll settle for thanking you. There'll be some coin for your help.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Scouts-Many-Marshes. I am a frustrated Argonian dockhand. 
Torbjorn Shatter-Shield is giving me trouble. I wish someone would beat the coin out of his fat fists. He clings to every coin.
He says an Argonian's labor is only worth a tenth of a "proper Nord worker." My people are not slaves! You can try talking with him, but we've gotten nowhere talking to him ourselves.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Omluag. I am a frustrated smelter worker for Mulush. 
Mulush is a damn tyrant. Always being goaded on by the Silver-Bloods to get more work out of us.
They pay us next to nothing. We get beaten if we make a mistake, and where are our kind Silver-Blood rulers? What are they doing? Typical.
You would stick up for us. You're going to try to talk sense into that man? I'll believe it when I see it.
It's a week's wages for me, but you've earned every coin if you talk some sense into Mulush.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Iddra. I am an innkeeper. Kynesgrove is a location. Iddra is present in Kynesgrove. Kynesgrove is a location. Kynesgrove is a village. Roggi is present in Kynesgrove. Roggi is a male Nord storyteller. 
Roggi has been in Kynesgrove forever. Great storyteller. Keeps everyone's spirits up. Owes me a lot of coin for drinks. I keep telling him not to worry about it, but he's got the stubborn Nord blood.
Damn fool doesn't have the coin to pay me back, so he just beats himself up over it, and then he gets thirsty, and it cycles all over again. If you could convince him that I don't care about his tab, it'd certainly make me feel better.
Roggi pawned a few of his things back when he still had things to pawn. Take them as your reward.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Haran. I am a bartender. The Frozen Hearth is a location. Haran is present in The Frozen Hearth. The Frozen Hearth is a location. The Frozen Hearth is a tavern. Ranmir is present in The Frozen Hearth. Ranmir is a male drunk. 
Ranmir owes this tavern enough coin to burn it down, build it back up, then burn it down again just for laughs.
He's had some troubles in his life, but I can't have him drinking here without at least paying back some of the coin he owes.
Go right ahead and talk to him. He just might be sober enough to listen to you.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Urag gro-Shub. I am a librarian. 
If you're feeling adventurous, I'm always looking for someone to procure valuable books from some more... dangerous locations.
Here, I scribbled down the last place I'd heard about. Check it out, but be careful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Storn Crag-Strider. I am a Skaal shaman. Saering's Watch is a location. Saering's Watch is a dragon lair. Wind Stone is a location. Wind Stone is a sacred stone of the Skaal. 
Our time here is running out. The few of us left free of control cannot protect ourselves for much longer.
You must go to Saering's Watch. Learn there the Word of Power that Miraak learned long ago, and use that knowledge on the Wind Stone.
You may be able to break the hold on our people there, and free them from control.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vilkas. I am a fellow member of the Companions. 
We have a bit of a sensitive matter this time. A wealthy family has... misplaced one of their heirlooms.
Of course, it's a group of wizards they're pointing their fingers at. Who knows what they want it for, but we want it back.
Move quickly so we can have this over and done with. These aren't the most glorious jobs, but they pay well.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farkas. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Whiterun is a location. Farkas is present in Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. 
Travelers have been coming to Whiterun. They tell stories about dragons. I've heard of them, but didn't think they were real.
Rumors also claim that you have defeated dragons before. You are a very brave person worthy of being a Companion. But I already knew that.
Let's go kill a dragon together. That's one way to find out if they're real. I even know where we might find one. Lead on!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Esbern. I am a scholar. 
I need to finish my research on dragons.
While you're out hunting dragons, keep a sharp eye open for any dragon scales and bones you might find. I'd be interested in looking at them.
Have you ever heard of the expression, "the scale of the lizard that bit you?" No, I guess not. Well, the principle applies here. I'll make you a potion, made from those dragon parts.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Esbern. I am a member of the Blades. 
The Blades of the old hunted down many dragons in their day, and they have records of where the beasts lived.
Only you can truly defeat these monsters, Dragonborn, but you do not have to do so alone. The Blades can help you.
Just ask whenever you're ready to take on a dragon. We will send the Blades to help you fulfill your destiny. The dragon's soul should make you stronger.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brand-Shei. I am an orphaned dark elf who was raised by Argonians in the Black Marsh. Morrowind is a location. Morrowind is the land of the dark elves. Black Marsh is a location. Black Marsh is the land of the Argonians. 
I may be dark elf by birth, but I was raised Argonian. Through reasons I'm still trying to discover, I ended up orphaned then taken in by a kindly Argonian family in Black Marsh. I hope one day to find out what happened to me... how I ended up like that.
I know when I was found by my Argonian father, I was wrapped in a blanket bearing the symbol of House Telvanni. It was one of the great houses in Morrowind long ago. Whether that means I was one of them or not, I'm uncertain.
If you come across anything in your travels that might provide me with the answers I'm looking for, I'd be grateful.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Faralda. I am the player's teacher in Destruction magic. "Power of the Elements" is an object. "Power of the Elements" is a book that contains clues about powerful Destruction magics. 
I daresay you've learned all I can teach you about Destruction magic. But... That doesn't mean there isn't more out there.
Over the years I've heard things. Powerful magics lost to the ages, incredible spells that only the most skilled mages can master. This book, "Power of the Elements", is the only thing I've ever found. I think it's better off in your hands.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Commander Maro. I am an army officer who has tracked the movements of the Dark Brotherhood.  is a location. the passphrase to the Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary: "Silence, my brother." is an object. 
The leader of the Dark Brotherhood? You mean that woman Astrid? Dead? And this is no jest? Ha! This is a stroke of good fortune. Long have I watched the Dark Brotherhood's movements... waiting for the time to strike. That time is now!
My agents have recently acquired the passphrase to their Sanctuary. It is, "Silence, my brother." Every assassin in that hole must be put down! You, my friend. You've slain their leader. This honor should be yours. Do this, and you will be rewarded most handsomely!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kerah. I am a jeweler native to Markarth. Markarth is a location. Kerah is present in Markarth. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city of stone and silver. Understone Keep is a location. Understone Keep is a keep in Markarth. Calcelmo is present in Understone Keep. Calcelmo is a male historian. 
My family came here centuries ago. We've made a good living smithing the silver that flows through the city. But you probably wanted to know about the fancy carvings and stonework, didn't you? Travelers always do.
Here, I have a delivery I need to make to Calcelmo in Understone Keep. Why don't you take the ring to him? He knows the history of Markarth better than anyone. He can be a bit difficult, but I'm sure he'll appreciate your help.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Septimus Signus. I am an insane yet intelligent scholar. 
You see this masterwork of the Dwemer. Deep inside their greatest knowings. Septimus is clever among men, but he is but an idiot child compared to the dullest of the Dwemer.
To harness it is to know. The fundaments. The Dwemer lockbox hides it from me. I see it now. The sealing structure interlocks in the tiniest fractals. Dwemer blood can loose the hooks, but none alive remain to bear it. A panoply of their brethren could gather to form a facsimile. A trick. Something they didn't anticipate, no, not even them.
The blood of Altmer, Bosmer, Dunmer, Falmer, and Orsimer. The elves still living provide the key. Bear you hence this extractor. It will drink the fresh blood of elves. Come when its set is complete.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sorex Vinius. I am an innkeeper. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Blue Palace is a location. Blue Palace is a palace in Solitude. Jarl Elisif the Fair is present in Blue Palace. Jarl Elisif the Fair is the noblewoman who rules over Solitude, who recently lost her husband, the king. Falk Firebeard is present in Blue Palace. Falk Firebeard is Jarl Elisif the Fair's male steward. Stros M'Kai Rum is an object. Stros M'Kai Rum is special drum. 
Jarl Elisif the Fair is in charge of solitude. Poor woman. Losing her husband and king like that. It was a dark day for us all.
Damn, that reminds me, I have a delivery to make to her steward, Falk Firebeard. He ordered a special bottle of Stros M'Kai Rum.
You could deliver it for me. Save me a lot of trouble. Here. Take it to the Blue Palace.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delphine. I am a paranoid member of the Blades. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Riverwood is a location. Riverwood is a village. 
The first thing we need to do is figure out who's behind the dragons. The Thalmor are our best lead. If they aren't involved, they'll know who is.
If we could get into the Thalmor Embassy... it's the center of their operations in Skyrim... Problem is, that place is locked up tighter than a miser's purse. They could teach me a few things about paranoia...
I have a few ideas about getting inside the Embassy, but I'll need some time to pull things together... Meet me back in Riverwood. If I'm not back when you get there, wait for me. I shouldn't be long.
Keep an eye on the sky. This is only going to get worse.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delphine. I am a paranoid member of the Blades. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. The Winking Skeever is a location. The Winking Skeever is an inn in Solitude.  is a location. Thalmor Embassy is a location. Elenwen is present in Thalmor Embassy. Elenwen is the female Thalmor ambassador. Malborn is present in The Winking Skeever. Malborn is a male wood elf who is Delphine's trusty contact inside the Thalmor Embassy. 
The Thalmor ambassador, Elenwen, regularly throws parties where the rich and connected cozy up to the Thalmor.
I can get you into one of those parties. Once you're inside the Embassy, you get away and find Elenwen's secret files. I have a contact inside the Embassy. He's not up for this kind of high-risk mission, but he can help you. His name's Malborn. Wood elf, plenty of reason to hate the Thalmor. You can trust him.
I'll get word for him to meet you in Solitude, at the Winking Skeever -- you know it? While you're doing that, I'll work on getting you an invitation to Elenwen's little party.
Meet me at the Solitude stables after you've arranged things with Malborn.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Hillevi Cruel-Sea. I am a food vendor. Hillevi Cruel-Sea's market stall is a location. Hillevi Cruel-Sea is present in Hillevi Cruel-Sea's market stall. Hollyfrost Farm is a location. Hollyfrost Farm is a farm owned by Hillevi Cruel-Sea's family. Nightshade is an object. Nightshade is a poisonous plant. 
Everything you see is grown at my family's own Hollyfrost Farm. Fresh and filling.
I also do a little herb growing. The court wizard, Wuunferth, pays us to plant a little Nightshade. Who knows what he uses it for? A poison like that?
Hey, could you deliver this bottle of Nightshade extract to Wuunferth?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aeri. I am the owner of Anga's Mill. Anga's Mill is a location. Aeri is present in Anga's Mill. Anga's Mill is a location. Anga's Mill is a sawmill. Dawnstar is a location. Dawnstar is a city. Skald the Elder is present in Dawnstar. Skald the Elder is the impatient Jarl of Dawnstar. 
If you're one of the Jarl's men, you'll get your lumber. Anga's Mill pays its debts.
Sorry, I thought Skald the Elder sent you. We've got an order to fill, and he's not known for patience.
Look, if you're heading towards Dawnstar anytime soon, can you give the Jarl this note? Let him know he'll get his lumber.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Thadgeir. I am an old warrior. Falkreath is a location. Thadgeir is present in Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a town known for its graveyard. Runil is present in Falkreath. Runil is a male priest of Arkay. Berit is present in Falkreath. Berit is Thadgeir's old, dead male war companion. 
Falkreath is known for its graveyard, traveler. We've buried more dead than you can imagine.
I just finished giving my old war companion, Berit, a proper burial by fire. Old hard head hated the idea of being lost cold in the ground.
Could you deliver the ashes to Runil, the priest of Arkay? He'll know the right blessings to make for Berit's soul.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Adonato Leotelli. I am a drama writer. Bards College is a location. Bards College is a college for bards. Giruad Gemane is present in Bards College. Giruad Gemane is a male bard. "Olaf and the Dragon" is an object. "Olaf and the Dragon" is a new book written by Adonato Leotelli. 
I write drama, friend. The legends and history of the world made to excite and inspire.
Poor Giruad Gemane at the Bards College has been waiting for my latest work, "Olaf and the Dragon," for weeks now. Roads are a mess.
You'll deliver the book for me? You're sure? When you see Giruad, ask for a tip. I'm sure he'll be in a good mood after reading this.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Banning. I am a dog breeder and trainer. Understone Keep is a location. Understone Keep is the Jarl's palace. Voada is present in Understone Keep. Voada is the Jarl's female dog handler. 
My family has been breeding and training dogs for years. You need one out in the wilderness. Don't want to be alone when some bandit comes swinging.
I personally trained a whole litter for the Jarl. That reminds me, I was going to deliver some dog food to the Keep. Spiced beef. Their favorite.
You volunteer to make trip and deliver the food? Well, look at you, thanks. Take it to Voada, she handles all the dogs for the Jarl.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sondas Drenim. I am an experienced elven miner. a mine whose tunnels are getting deep into the rock is a location. Sondas Drenim is present in a mine whose tunnels are getting deep into the rock. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. White Phial is a location. White Phial is an apothecary store in Windhelm. 
This mine is only a few years old, but I've been digging up ore for over a century.
We're getting to the point where the tunnels are getting deep into the rock. People complain of bad coughs and foul air. I've seen this before. We need some medicines to combat the ore dust. I was about to send a message to Windhelm for aid.
Could you deliver that message on my behalf? Take it to Quintus, in the White Phial.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Idgrod the Younger. I am a concerned sister. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Temple of Kynareth is a location. Temple of Kynareth is a temple. Danica Pure-Spring is present in Temple of Kynareth. Danica Pure-Spring is a priestess. 
My brother Joric is... sensitive. He has trouble focusing his attention on things.
We were taking him to the Temple of Kynareth in Whiterun, just so the healers could make sure he was in good health, and they say he's fine.
Are you heading to Whiterun? Could you take this letter to the priestess, Danica Pure-Spring? It's a note about Joric's health.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Cicero. I am a madman who is transporting his dead mother to a new crypt. on the road near Loreius Farm is a location. Cicero is present in on the road near Loreius Farm. Loreius Farm is a location. Loreius Farm is a farm off the road. Loreius is present in Loreius Farm. Loreius is a male farmer with tools. 
Poor Cicero is stuck. Can't you see? I was transporting my dear, sweet mother. Well, not her. Her corpse! She's quite dead. I'm taking mother to a new home. A new crypt. But... aggh! Wagon wheel! Damnedest wagon wheel! It broke! Don't you see?
Oh. Oh yes! Yes, the kindly stranger can certainly help! Go to the farm - the Loreius Farm. Just over there, off the road. Talk to Loreius. He has tools! He can help me! But he won't! He refuses! Convince Loreius to fix my wheel! Do that, and poor Cicero will reward you. With coin! Gleamy, shiny coin!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's dying leader in the Dark Brotherhood. 
Alive.... You're alive... Thank Sithis...
Ssshhh.... Please. There is much... I have to say. And... not much time... I'm sorry. So very sorry. The Penitus Oculatus... Maro... He said that by giving you to them, he would leave the Dark Brotherhood alone. Forever. By Sithis, I was such a fool. All of this... it's all my fault. You are the best of us, and I nearly killed you... as I've killed everyone else...
I'm saying you were right. The Night Mother was right. The old ways... they guided the Dark Brotherhood for centuries. I was a fool to oppose them. And to prove my... sincerity, I have prayed for a contract. You lead this Family now. I give you the Blade of Woe, so that you can see it through.
You must kill... Me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dengeir of Stuhn. I am a descendant of Vighar. Falkreath is a location. Dengeir of Stuhn is present in Falkreath. Falkreath is a location. Falkreath is a town. Bloodlet Throne is a location. Bloodlet Throne is a nest of vampires. Vighar is present in Bloodlet Throne. Vighar is a male vampire. 
You may have seen the open grave in our graveyard. Most of the townsfolk think it's the work of a corpse thief. The truth is less pleasant. It is...was, the grave of Vighar, my own ancestor, dead for centuries now.
Vighar is a vampire. My family is entrusted with keeping him buried, but recently someone stole the wardstone that sealed him in the grave, and Vighar escaped. It's too late for the wardstone. Vighar must be destroyed. If this gets out, my family will suffer great shame.
See that Vighar is destroyed. He will have fled to gather others of his kind at Bloodlet Throne.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Maven Black-Briar. I am a dishonest meadery owner. Honningbrew Meadery is a location. Honningbrew Meadery is a meadery, Maven Black-Briar's competitor. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Bannered Mare is a location. Bannered Mare is an inn in Whiterun. Mallus Maccius is present in Bannered Mare. Mallus Maccius is Maven Black-Briar's inside man at the Honningbrew Meadery. 
This is an important job. I have a competitor called Honningbrew Meadery that I want to put out of business. I also want to know how they managed to get the place up and running so quickly.
Some layabout named Sabjorn runs the Honningbrew Meadery. Been a thorn in my side for the last few years now. With Sabjorn in prison, his meadery will be forced to close. Then I swoop in and take over the place. No more competition.
Head to the Bannered Mare in Whiterun and look for Mallus Maccius. He'll fill you in on all the details.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Erikur. I am an angry merchant. Red Wave is a location. Red Wave is a ship.  is a location. Dainty Sload is a location. Dainty Sload is Captain Volf's ship. ashore is a location. Captain Volf is present in ashore. Captain Volf is a male sea captain. Sabine Nyette is present in down by the docks. Sabine Nyette is the female first mate of the Red Wave. Balmora Blue is an object. Balmora Blue is an illegal drug. 
It's about time you got here. I'm not accustomed to dealing with people who are unreliable. That's why I asked Delvin to send me his best.
Nothing raises my ire more than having an agreement broken. It's bad for business and it wastes time. Captain Volf of the Dainty Sload has decided to test my patience on this matter by neglecting to honor a trade agreement we had established.
I need you to help me show him the error of his ways by sneaking on board the Sload and planting some contraband. You'll need to get your hands on some Balmora Blue from Sabine Nyette down by the docks. She's the first mate on another ship, the Red Wave.
Once you get your hands on it, I want you to plant it in Captain Volf's footlocker. I'll take care of the rest. Captain Volf is ashore right now and I want the authorities waiting for him when he gets back.
Now get going... I don't want to see your face until the job's done.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Nightingale Sentinel. I am a ghost who is dying, trapped in this chamber. Pilgrim's Path is a location. Pilgrim's Path is a dangerous path to the Ebonmere. Ebonmere is a location. Ebonmere is a portal held open by the Skeleton Key. Skeleton Key is an object. Skeleton Key is an important relic, a key. 
The Key! You have the Skeleton Key! I never thought I'd see it again.
You've done the Guild a great deed. And although they may not show it, I'm certain they appreciate your sacrifices. My only regret is that you had to undertake this task alone.
Nothing would bring me more pride than to return the Key, but I'm afraid it's impossible. From the moment I arrived here, I've felt myself... well... dying.
I'm afraid you have return the Key alone. I'm weakening, and I can feel myself slipping away. The years without restoration of my power have taken their toll. Whatever damage has been caused can only be corrected by following the Pilgrim's Path to the Ebonmere and replacing the Key.
The only possible help I've come across are the remains of some poor fellow who was trying to follow in your footsteps. Perhaps his journal can help?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Atub. I am the wisewoman of the orc clan. walled orc camp is a location. Atub is present in walled orc camp. Yamarz is present in walled orc camp. Yamarz is the male chief of the orc clan, who was a strong and proud warrior. Troll Fat is an object. Troll Fat is an alchemy ingredient. Daedra Heart is an object. Daedra Heart is an alchemy ingredient. 
Please, our tribe suffers and we need help.
Our Chief, Yamarz, was once a strong and proud warrior. Now he is stricken, cursed. He is weak, and so our tribe is weak. The giants sense this, and intrude on our territory. Now they assault our very home.
Yamarz refuses help, but I sense that you may be just what we need. He has demanded we stay inside the walls. We cannot leave. I must petition Malacath for relief. This curse must be lifted. But I cannot travel to Malacath's shrine. The ritual must be done here, and I do not have the materials I need.
I beg of you, can you bring me Troll Fat and a Daedra Heart? I have no wish to depend on a stranger, but I have no choice.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's guildmaster in the Dark Brotherhood. Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary is a location. Astrid is present in Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary.  is a location.  is a location. outside by the pool is a location. Shadowmere is present in outside by the pool. Shadowmere is Astrid's male horse. 
The fool Cicero went absolutely berserk! He wounded Veezara, tried to kill me, and then he fled. I knew that lunatic couldn't be trusted.
Nothing set Cicero off. At least nothing I'm aware of. Well... If I'm being honest, I haven't exactly been discreet lately in expressing my frustration with this whole situation. Obeying the Night Mother. You being the Listener. It's ridiculous. No offense. Cicero may have overheard me talking to one of the others about the Night Mother. It's possible I was... not entirely respectful. But to go this far. To attempt to murder the leader of a Sanctuary. Cicero must pay with his life. There is no other option.
I want you to find that miserable little fool and end his life! But first... find my husband. Make sure he's all right. After the attack, Arnbjorn flew into a rage. When Cicero left... Arnbjorn went after him. They disappeared into the wild. Take my horse, Shadowmere. You'll find him outside, by the pool, when you go find Arnbjorn. Search Cicero's room here. Maybe there's something in there that sheds some light on where he might have gone.
Let me know the minute you find something. I've got to see to Veezara, and calm everyone down.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Phinis Gestor. I am the player's teacher in conjuration magic. Hall of Attainment is a location. Hall of Attainment is a tall building.  is a location. 
How quickly you've advanced. Most impressive. There are spells yet to be learned, powerful spells that can more closely and more permanently bind creatures to your will. These spells are difficult, even for one as skilled as I. To even begin to inscribe them, I need something very special. A sigil stone from an Oblivion gate.
I do not have one in my possession. Nor do you, I'm sure. So we require a Dremora to retrieve one for us. You will summon one, and order it to bring a sigil stone to you. I will then inscribe the spells for you.
But there are risks. There are always risks. You must summon and command an unbound Dremora. Summoning an Unbound Dremora is not like other Conjuration spells. It will not simply do your bidding. You must first prove you are in control.
I will teach you the spell to summon the Dremora, but know that it will only work in a place properly prepared for the event. Here is the spell you need. Go to the top of the Hall of Attainment; I have prepared a place for you there.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Barbas. I am Clavicus Vile's dog who was kicked out by Clavicus Vile. Haemar's Shame is a location. Haemar's Shame is a den of cultists worshiping Clavicus Vile. 
You are exactly what I was looking for. You see, my name is Barbas. And I have a problem I think you can help sort out.
My master and I had a bit of a falling out. We got into an argument and it got rather... heated. He's kicked me out until I find someone who can settle our disagreement. That's where you come in.
My master is Clavicus Vile, the prince of wishes. As you can imagine, he's quite the important person.  Now, since he banished me, Vile's been rather weak. He can't manifest very far from one of his shrines. I know there's a cult that worships him at Haemar's Shame. We should be able to talk to him there.
If this works out, I'll make sure you're rewarded. Just don't trust any offer he makes you... okay?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Galmar Stone-Fist. I am the player's commanding officer in the Stormcloaks. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city in Skyrim. Raerek is present in Markarth. Raerek is the Jarl's male steward, and a secret Talos worshiper. 
Get over to Markarth. Rumor has it the Jarl's Steward, Raerek, is a faithful Talos worshiper, if not a true son of Skyrim - he still supports the Empire, after all.
But, if confronted with proof of his belief, you might be able to 'persuade' him to aid our cause, indirectly of course. Wouldn't want to sully his reputation, would we?
You'll need to be careful with this one. The Jarl's men won't look kindly on you rummaging through the steward's quarters.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Legate Rikke. I am the player's commanding officer in the Imperial Legion. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Anuriel is present in Riften. Anuriel is the Jarl's corrupt female steward who has secret arrangements with the Thieves Guild. 
You're going to Riften. My spies report the Jarl's Steward, Anuriel, has arrangements with the Thieves Guild that would be rather embarrassing if made public.
I need you to find evidence of her corrupt activities, and use it to gain a measure of her "cooperation."
This will require stealth and discretion. The Jarl's guards won't take kindly to anyone rummaging through the steward's private quarters.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Klimmek. I am an old man. High Hrothgar is a location. High Hrothgar is the secluded home of the Greybeards. 
Passing through on your way to High Hrothgar? About to make a delivery up there myself.
I mostly deliver food supplies like dried fish and salted meats; you know, things that keep fresh for a long time. The Greybeards tend not to get out much, if you catch my meaning.
It's kind of an understanding between us. I mean, it just wouldn't feel right to charge them for a bit of preserved food. Trouble is, my legs aren't what they used to be and climbing the 7,000 Steps takes its toll.
You'd like to make the delivery for me? Really? That would be kind of you. Here, take this bag of supplies. At the top of the steps you'll see the offering chest. Just leave the bag inside and you're done.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Elder Othreloth. I am a dark elf priest. Temple is a location. Elder Othreloth is present in Temple. Ancestral Tombs is a location. Ancestral Tombs is tombs where dark elves inter their dead.  is a location. 
The Ancestral Tombs are where we inter our dead. They are sacred places, meant to honor their passing. Sadly, we've been unable to use the Ancestral Tomb beneath the Temple as of late, and have resorted to other locations to scatter the remains.
Those foul vermin... the abominations we call ash spawn have risen from the ashes of our own ancestors. They're befouling the memories of our forefathers by defiling their remains.
Could you cleanse the tomb for us, wanderer? That would be most kind. Here, this key should open the door to the tomb.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brynjolf. I am a thief. 
I've got a bit of an errand to perform, but I need an extra pair of hands. And in my line of work, extra hands are well-paid.
It's simple... I'm going to cause a distraction and you're going to steal Madesi's silver ring from a strongbox under his stand. Once you have it, I want you to place it in Brand-Shei's pocket without him noticing.
There's someone that wants to see Brand-Shei put out of business permanently. That's all you need to know. Now, you tell me when you're ready and we'll get started.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Svana Far-Shield. I am a woman who hates Haelga. Mark of Dibella, Marks of Dibella is an object. Mark of Dibella, Marks of Dibella is tokens of Haelga's affection. 
I hate Haelga! It's everything about her. She's disgusting. I think she takes her worship of Dibella a bit too seriously.
Do you know she's slept with three different men in the last month alone? What kind of a woman would do such a thing? Just for once, I'd like to see her squirm... to rub her nose in it.
Actually, there is a way to do this, but I don't think I could get away with doing it. She'd kill me if she found out. You see, I happen to know after she makes love, she gives her partner a token of her affection called a Mark of Dibella. If you confront her with three of the Marks of Dibella, she'd be so embarrassed... well, I don't know what she'd do!
Oh, this is going to be great! You need to get the Marks of Dibella from Bolli, Hofgrir and Indaryn. Not sure how you're going to do that, but try your best. Then just confront Haelga with them and the rest works itself out.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Calcelmo. I am a scholar researching the Dwemer, giving quest via "Letter from Calcelmo". Warmaiden's is a location. Warmaiden's is a shop. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a city. "Letter from Calcelmo" is an object. "Letter from Calcelmo" is a letter. 
Letter from Calcelmo
by Calcelmo

Dragonborn,
It has come to my attention you may have recently acquired a certain Dwemer sword from Warmaiden's.
I'm not sure how such an object came to find itself resting there... but I've been trying to obtain one for my research.
If you still have it, or if not, find another one, I would be most appreciative if you were to bring it to me here in Markarth. I will pay handsomely.

Sincerely,
Calcelmo

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Vex. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. 
I have a little job for you. Pretty simple. Break into a house, grab a specific item and get out before they realize what's going on.
The catch is you can't kill anyone who lives there or you forfeit the payment. You ready for some good old-fashioned burglary?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Lars Battle-Born. I am a young boy who can't fight. 
I'm having trouble. Braith bullies me all the time. All the elders think I'm a milk drinker 'cause I can't fight. Nobody understands.
If you can get Braith to leave me alone, I'll be your best friend... forever! I'll pay you, too! My whole life's savings - two septims!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm.  is a location. 
I've been having difficulties with my heart stone experiments.
Have you heard of the Briarhearts? They are fierce warriors of the Forsworn tribes. They actually remove their own hearts, and replace them with large briar seeds. It puts their lifesparks in direct connection to the natural forces.
Well, I'm hoping to do something similar... if I could connect a living being to the forces of nature... well... that would be formidable. I've done some experiments in this area, but, well, my test subjects are far too fragile. I'm hoping to learn some of the Briarheart techniques, their methods.
I need you to examine one of them. Just investigate as much as you can. The Forsworn live in the hills on the western edge of Skyrim. From there, you're on your own. I'm given to understand that they are not difficult to find, if you gather my inference.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Meridia. I am the lady of light, a goddess. Kilkreath is a location. Kilkreath is Meridia's shrine. 
The Necromancer Malkoran defiles my shrine with vile corruptions, trapping lost souls left in the wake of this war to do his bidding. Worse still, he uses the power stored within my own token to fuel his foul deeds.
Mortals call my token Dawnbreaker, for it was forged in a holy light that breaks upon my foes, burning away corruption and false life. You will enter my shrine, destroy Malkoran, and retrieve this mighty blade.
I have brought you here, mortal, to be my champion. You will do this. I have commanded it!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dravin Llanith. I am a farmer. Dravin Llanith's farm is a location. Dravin Llanith is present in Dravin Llanith's farm. Riften is a location. Riften is a city. Ratway is a location. Ratway is a sewer in Riften. 
A few days ago, some thieves from Riften broke in here and stole it! Can you imagine? Took the only thing of value we had. It was a family heirloom. I can't even put a price on how much that thing means to me.
I'm sure that they are from Riften. I bumped into them when I was coming back to my farm after buying supplies. I know those lowlifes took it with them back to the Ratway. They left an unmistakable stench behind.
If you have the guts to head into the Ratway and get my bow back, I'll pay you what I can. It would be nice to have it back... means a lot to me.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Gabriella. I am a fellow member of the Dark Brotherhood. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Dragon Bridge is a location. Dragon Bridge is a town in Skyrim. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Olava the Feeble is present in Whiterun. Olava the Feeble is Gabriella's old female friend, and a powerful seer. 
Dear sibling. I've been waiting for you. Your next contract awaits, as I'm sure Astrid indicated.
With the Emperor's arrival in Skyrim now a certainty, his security service, the Penitus Oculatus, will need to begin its preparations immediately. Security is being handled by a Commander Maro. Astrid and I have devised a plan to break the man, and in doing so, cripple the Emperor's protection.
You are to slay the commander's son, Gaius Maro, and once he is dead, plant false evidence on his body implicating him in a plot to kill the Emperor. He is set to leave the Penitus Oculatus outpost at Dragon Bridge, and inspect the security of each city in Skyrim. Go there now. Observe Gaius Maro's departure, and follow him. Waylay him in one of the cities, and send his soul to Sithis. Once he's dead, plant the incriminating letter on his body, and let fate take care of the rest. Oh, and one final thing...
To earn your bonus, do not kill Gaius Maro in Dragon Bridge, or on the road. Kill him in one of the other major cities he'll be visiting. There, the body will be discovered quickly, as will the letter implicating Gaius Maro in the plot to assassinate the Emperor. Do that, and Astrid has authorized me to grant you a rather unique bonus. It is a special token, to be given to Olava the Feeble, in Whiterun. Olava is an old and dear friend, and a powerful seer. The token entitles you to a reading of your future. It's an opportunity one should not pass up.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Astrid. I am the player's guildleader in the Dark Brotherhood. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Temple of the Divines is a location. Temple of the Divines is a large temple in Solitude. Vittoria Vici is present in Temple of the Divines. Vittoria Vici is the overseer of the the East Empire Company's business holdings in Solitude, and the first cousin of the Emperor. 
Splendid. We're ready to begin. Or, more specifically, you're ready to begin. After all, you're the one the Night Mother spoke to.
Now then. I hope you have something nice to wear. Because you're going to a wedding. Well, more like the public reception. It should be a lovely affair. You'll mingle with the guests, eat some cake... stab the bride.
Oh yes. You've got to kill the bride. At her wedding. And they say romance is dead. Your target's name is Vittoria Vici. She oversees the East Empire Company's business holdings in Solitude. The wedding is being held in that city, at the Temple of the Divines. Her death will cause an uproar, which is exactly what we want.
Vittoria Vici is the first cousin to our dear Emperor, Titus Mede II. Vici has obvious Imperial connections. Her husband has ties to the Stormcloaks. Their union is a step toward reconciliation. So if there's a murder at the wedding... Not only will it stall the peace process - it will send shockwaves throughout the entire Empire. The Emperor's hand will be forced. He'll have to travel to Skyrim to deal with the aftermath... and he'll find the Dark Brotherhood waiting.
Vici is likely to address her guests frequently, as is the wedding custom. Kill her when she does that, and I promise you a significant bonus.
Now go. And give the city of Solitude a celebration they're not likely to forget.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Dinya Balu. I am a priestess of Mara. Ivarstead is a location. Ivarstead is a village. Fastred is present in Ivarstead. Fastred is a young woman. 
I am devoted to the Goddess Mara, who gave mortals the gift of love that they might have a hint of eternity. Her blessings are many. To love is to know the true nature of the gods.
Not all can hear the broad echoes of deepest dawn. To receive the touch of Mara, you must first act as her hands in the world. Explore the facets of the infinite jewel. Are you prepared, then, to help bring the light across this land?
The dawn surely opens upon you, child. You must bear its light that all may see. Mara has reflected an image to me. A young woman... almost a girl... her fickle love must resolve itself. The village of Ivarstead. The woman, Fastred. This is the prayer heard by the goddess and relayed to her servants.
Return when Fastred has seen her path. I will entreat Mara on your behalf.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Maramal. I am a priest of Mara. Temple of Mara is a location. Maramal is present in Temple of Mara.  is a location. 
Mara is the Goddess of Love. The temple spreads her gifts by tending to the sick, the poor, and the lost. We also perform wedding ceremonies for all the loving couples.
You wish to be married to your future spouse? It's good to see love blossoming, even during these difficult times. Your wedding will be held tomorrow, from dawn until dusk, in the Temple of Mara.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 
We are forged by Boethiah's example. We carve our will upon the world through our tongues and our blades. You? You are nothing. An empty vapor, dispersed by the slightest breeze.
If you desire a glimpse of Boethiah, our Dark Mistress, then this is what you must do. First, prove your tongue can wield a lie. Find someone. Gain his trust. Lead him to the shrine above. Next, instruct your thrall to touch the Pillar of Sacrifice. Its magic will ensnare him, rendering him helpless. Then, girded with certitude, plant the ceremonial blade deeply, so that the waters of his heart wash over you.
If your will is strong enough, it will stir Boethiah in her Dark Mansion, and she will appear before us.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Hofgrir Horse-Crusher. I am the man with the the strongest arms in all of Skyrim. out in the wilderness is a location. Hofgrir Horse-Crusher is present in out in the wilderness. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. 
Bah, I'm not afraid of anything out here. Walls are just a weakling's hiding spot. Now me, I'm no weakling. In fact, I bet I've got the strongest arms in all of Skyrim.
You bet against me? Oh! Sounds like I've got a challenger. Tell you what. How about a friendly wager, just between us. I bet you my entire purse of septims I can beat you in a fistfight. You match the bet and we fight until one of us gives in.
All right, remember... this is a clean fight. No weapons, no tricks. And none of those fancy magic spells, either. Here we go!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kodlak Whitemane. I am the player's guildleader in the Companions, and a Nord who wants to end up in Sovngarde. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the storied afterlife of heroic Nords. Hunting Grounds is a location. Hunting Grounds is Hircine's realm, a place where the player can hunt forever.  is a location. 
Have you heard the story of how we came to be werewolves?
The Companions are nearly five thousand years old. This matter of beastblood has only troubled us for a few hundred. One of my predecessors was a good, but short-sighted man. He made a bargain with the witches of Glenmoril Coven. If the Companions would hunt in the name of their lord, Hircine, we would be granted great power.
The Companions of old became werewolves. They did not believe the change would be permanent. The witches offered payment, like anyone else. But we had been deceived. The disease, you see, affects not just our bodies. It seeps into the spirit. Upon death, werewolves are claimed by Hircine for his Hunting Grounds. For some, this is a paradise. They want nothing more than to chase prey with their master for eternity. And that is their choice. But I am still a true Nord. And I wish for Sovngarde as my spirit home.
I've spent my twilight years trying to find a cure myself. And now I've found the answer. The witches' magic ensnared us, and only their magic can release us. They won't give it willingly, but we can extract their foul powers by force. I want you to seek them out. Go to their coven in the wilderness. Strike them down as a true warrior of the wild. And bring me their heads. The seat of their abilities. From there, we may begin to undo centuries of impurity.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Danica Pure-Spring. I am a priestess of Kynareth. the Gildergreen in Whiterun is a location. Danica Pure-Spring is present in the Gildergreen in Whiterun. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Orphan Rock is a location. Orphan Rock is a Hagraven nest. Gildergreen is an object. Gildergreen is the big holy tree of Kynareth that died. Eldergleam is an object. Eldergleam is the ancient parent tree of the Gildergreen. Nettlebane is an object. Nettlebane is a weapon that can cut the Eldergleam. 
This is the Gildergreen. It was planted as a seedling in the early years of Whiterun. Disciples of Kynareth could sense something holy in it, and traveled far to hear the winds of the goddess in its branches. Of course, not as many pilgrims these days. A big dead tree isn't very inspiring if you're coming to worship the divine of wind and rains. Kynareth gives life, and we need a living tree to be her symbol.
I've thought about restoring the Gildergreen... Trees like this never really die. They only slumber. I think if we had some of the sap from the parent tree, Eldergleam, we could wake up its child. But even if you could get to the Eldergleam, you couldn't tap it. Not with any normal metal. If you want to help, you'll need something to cut into it first.
Eldergleam is older than metal, from a time before men or elves. To even affect it, you have to tap into the old magic. You'll have to deal with the Hagravens. I've heard about a weapon they've made for sacrificing Kynareth's creations. It's called "Nettlebane." The hags terrify me, or I would have gone after it myself. It's held in a Hagraven nest called Orphan Rock

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delphine. I am a member of the Blades. Kynesgrove is a location. Kynesgrove is a village. 
Dragons aren't just coming back, they're coming back to life. They weren't gone somewhere for all these years. They were dead, killed off centuries ago by my predecessors. Now something's happening to bring them back to life. And I need you to help me stop it.
I've visited their ancient burial mounds and found them empty. And I've figured out where the next one will come back to life. We're going to go there, and you're going to kill that dragon. If we succeed, I'll tell you anything you want to know.
We are going to Kynesgrove. There's an ancient dragon burial near there. If we can get there before the dragon comes back, maybe we'll learn how to stop it.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Farengar Secret-Fire. I am a wizard. Bleak Falls Barrow is a location. Bleak Falls Barrow is a dangerous ruin. Dragonstone is an object. Dragonstone is a stone tablet that contains a map of dragon burial sites. 
I could use someone to fetch something for me. Well, when I say fetch, I really mean delve into a dangerous ruin in search of an ancient stone tablet that may or may not actually be there.
I, ah, learned of a certain stone tablet said to be housed in Bleak Falls Barrow - a 'Dragonstone,' said to contain a map of dragon burial sites. Go to Bleak Falls Barrow, find this tablet - no doubt interred in the main chamber - and bring it to me. Simplicity itself.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 
I could use some help around the forge. How about you smith me an iron dagger? Here's everything you need to make one. Go ahead.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Candlehearth Hall is a location. Candlehearth Hall is a tavern.  is a location. Hall of the Dead is a location. Hall of the Dead is a temple where the dead are prepared for burial. Helgird is present in Hall of the Dead. Helgird is a bit crazy woman who knows her dead bodies. Susanna is present in Hall of the Dead. Susanna is a barmaid from Candlehearth Hall, and the victim at the murder scene. 
Another girl killed. The victim is Susanna, from Candlehearth Hall. Served me a drink just a few nights ago... but I can't say I knew her.
She was killed the same way as the other two girls. Looks like she was stabbed, and then cut apart. It's like an animal got to her, but these are the wounds of a blade.
You could help us with the investigation. We're stretched thin as it is with the war. Nobody has the time to spend on this. Not pleasant, but it's the truth.
Here are some starting points for you. I noticed a trail of blood leading away from here. Helgird's taken Susanna's body into the Hall of the Dead to prepare for burial. She's a little crazy, but if she knows anything, it's dead bodies.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aranea Ienith. I am an old priestess of Azura. Azura's shrine, up the steps to the altar is a location. Aranea Ienith is present in Azura's shrine, up the steps to the altar. Winterhold is a location. Winterhold is a fortress, endangered by water, yet untouched by it. 
Azura has seen your coming, traveler. It was not curiosity, but fate, that has led you here.
Azura has given me the gift of foresight. I had a vision of you walking up the steps to this altar long before you were born. You have been chosen to be her champion. I know it is unexpected, but do not worry. It will all unfold as she has predicted.
You must go to a fortress, endangered by water, yet untouched by it. Inside, you will find an elven mage who can turn the brightest star as black as night. It is cryptic, I know, but Azura's signs are never wrong. I believe the fortress may refer to Winterhold. Ask if they know this elven enchanter.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 White Ridge Barrow is a location. White Ridge Barrow is a tomb. 
I know things. Hidden things. Things you aren't supposed to know.
I'm not alright! No! That's what I'm trying to say. The secrets. They're in there. In there deep. Can't get them out. They're in my head. They might leak out. Don't want them crawling into your head, too. Like me.
The Black Book taught me the secrets. It shoved them in my head. With black slick fingers. My fingers are too short. I can't get them out. I didn't find the Black Book. It found me. Here. I'll show you. See. Right there, in White Ridge Barrow. But don't go there. You don't want these things in your head. You don't!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Alvor. I am a man who saw a dragon flying down from the south. Riverwood is a location. Alvor is present in Riverwood. Riverwood is a location. Riverwood is a defenseless village. Helgen is a location. Helgen is a village that was destroyed by a dragon. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. Balgruuf is present in Whiterun. Balgruuf is the Jarl of Whiterun. 
What? A dragon? In Helgen? That explains what I saw earlier... a dragon flying down from the south... I was hoping I was wrong about what I thought it was... Didn't want to believe my own eyes, is all.
The Jarl needs to know if there's a dragon on the loose. Riverwood is defenseless... We need to get word to Jarl Balgruuf in Whiterun to send whatever soldiers he can. If you'll do that for me, I'll be in your debt.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am General Tullius. I am the player's leader in the Imperial Legion. Tamriel is a location. Tamriel is a continent. Windhelm is a location. Windhelm is a city. Ulfric is present in Windhelm. Ulfric is the man who leads the Stormcloaks. 
All right. It's time to deliver the final blow to the Stormcloak rebellion. You all have fought bravely, and sacrificed much to bring us to this point.
Ulfric thinks he can hide behind the walls of his castle. But we will fight our way in and drag him out through the rubble to face justice. Because this is the end for them, the Stormcloaks will fight like cornered rats. They will be fierce and crafty. But they are no match for Legionnaires.
You are the best and the brightest warriors in Tamriel. Professional soldiers, fearless and devastating. The Emperor will be paying close attention to what happens here today. Men who distinguish themselves will be well rewarded.
Ready now! Everyone, with me! For the Empire! For the Legion!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Delvin Mallory. I am a fellow member of the Thieves Guild. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city. 
Sometimes we like to remind a city that we mean business, so we hit it hard. Just steal whatever we can until we've made an impression.
Simple right? Almost. The catch is it doesn't count if anyone sees you take it. The message needs to be clear; we work in the shadows.
Steal from anywhere in Whiterun, and you even get to keep everythin' you stole. So, you in?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Galmar Stone-Fist. I am the player's commanding officer in the Stormcloaks, a Nord. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city with tall, yet old and crumbling walls. 
This is it men! They say that our cause is false and that we are nothing more than thieves, thugs and murderers! But no! We are farmers! We are craftsmen! We are sons and daughters of shopkeepers, maid servants and soldiers!
We are the sons and daughters of Skyrim! And we have come this far because our cause is true. Because we fight as one. And because our hearts are bursting with anger! What we do here today, we do for our country! For all the true Nords of Skyrim!
Whiterun's walls are tall, but they are old and crumbling, like the Empire whose Legion lines them. They've barricades to block us, but we'll tear through them and the Imperials behind them! Our objective is the drawbridge. If we can find a way to drop it, the city will be ours!
Everyone on me. Let's show these Imperial milk drinkers what true Nords look like! Rrrrraaaaaarrrrr!!!!!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Legate Rikke. I am the player's commanding officer in the Imperial Legion. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Whiterun is a location. Whiterun is a city in Skyrim. 
This is it men! This is an important day for the Empire and for the Legion. And for all of Skyrim.
This is the day we send a message to Ulfric and the rebel Jarls who support him. We will protect Whiterun from Stormcloaks. But make no mistake. What we do here today, we do for Skyrim and her people. By cutting out the disease of this rebellion, we will make this country whole again!
Ready now! Everyone, with me! For the Empire! For the Legion!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Ulfric. I am the player's leader in the Stormcloaks. Solitude is a location. Ulfric is present in Solitude. Castle Dour is a location. Castle Dour is the headquarters of the Imperial legion. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a province of the Empire. Sovngarde is a location. Sovngarde is the storied afterlife of heroes. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city in Skyrim. 
This is it men! It's time to make this city ours!
We come to this moment carried by the sacrifices and the courage of our fellows. Those who have fallen. And those still bearing the shields to our right. On this day, our enemy will know the fullness of our determination, the true depth of our anger, and the exalted righteousness of our cause.
The gods are watching. The spirits of our ancestors are stirring. And the men under suns yet to dawn will be transformed by what we do here today. Fear neither pain, nor darkness. For Sovngarde awaits those who die with weapons in their hands, and courage in their hearts.
We now fight our way to Castle Dour to cut the head off the legion itself! And in that moment, the gods will look down and see Skyrim as she was meant to be. Full of Nords who are mighty, powerful, and free!
Ready now! Everyone, with me! For the sons and daughters of Skyrim!

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Neloth. I am a wizard, and a collector of magical staffs. Frostmere Depths is a location. Frostmere Depths is a cave. 
I have a slightly more personal request. You see, I'm a collector. Of staffs. Magical staffs. In particular, those made by Azra Nightwielder.
Azra Nightwielder was the original shadowmage. His advances in magic are legendary. Less well known is that he was also a pioneer in the field of enchanting staffs. Nightwielder's creations don't really hold up in comparison to what can be made today, but they have a sentimental value for me. You understand.
Through some divinations, I believe I've located one of Azra Nightwielder's staffs in Frostmere Depths. If you retrieve it, I'll give you a staff of my own making.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Glover Mallory. I am a blacksmith. Ancient Nordic Pickaxe is an object. Ancient Nordic Pickaxe is a pickaxe, the only tool tough enough to crack stalhrim, becoming rare because forging them is a lost art. 
You haven't seen Crescius Caerellius have you? That foolish old man's taken my pickaxe again!
I'm not fussing over a simple pickaxe. No, no, no. This isn't just your run-of-the-mill pickaxe... I'm talking about an Ancient Nordic Pickaxe. They don't exactly grow on trees, you know.
An Ancient Nordic Pickaxe is the only tool tough enough to crack stalhrim, is what it is. Not many of those beauties left in the world... forging them is a lost art.
Look, if you see Crescius, tell him to give me that pickaxe back and I'll pay you for the trouble.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Frea. I am a woman whose father sacrificed himself for the player. 
Go. My father sacrificed himself so that you could destroy Miraak and lift his master's shadow from the land.
Go, then. Kill Miraak. Do not fail.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Arniel Gane. I am a fellow mage of the College of Winterhold. Dwemer Cogs is an object. Dwemer Cogs is special cogs. 
I can't help but notice that you're doing quite well for yourself, rising through the ranks and all.
It may not be "official", but there is a, uhh, project I've been working on. I wonder if perhaps you could assist with it.
Just... Just bring me some Dwemer Cogs. I need to examine them for the methods used in forging them. Ten of them should be enough for me to get a better understanding of how they were crafted. That's all I need, all right?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Arniel Gane. I am a mage. 
There is something you can do for me.
I had retained Enthir's services in, uhh, acquiring something specific. But now he's refusing to deliver. Could you perhaps speak with him, and see if we can come to some sort of arrangement?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Arniel Gane. I am a scholar fascinated by the Dwemer. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm.  is a location. Dwarven Convectors, Convectors is an object. Dwarven Convectors, Convectors is Dwemer machines that were used to purify gems. 
The Dwemer, they were uhh, masters of magic in a way we can't even begin to conceive of. Their greatest achievement, however, has also been their greatest, shall we say... mystery.
This mystery is their disappearance, of course! Instant, unexplainable. The stories have fascinated me... Ever since I was young, I wanted to know what really happened. After years and years of work, I'm closing in on a way to investigate what happened through experimentation.
Only now... Well, it's simply a disaster. Without boring you with the, ahh, details, I am attempting to re-create the circumstances of the event. I used the soul gem you brought me for this. The soul gem by itself isn't enough, you see. It needs to be altered, purified. The Dwemer had machines for this sort of thing. I attempted to build my own, based on designs and using parts you helped to provide. My very own Dwemer machine. It worked, but not fully. And the uhh... The device was destroyed in the process.
The designs for my Convector were based on real Dwemer machines, so there may still be some in existence. I'd go looking myself, but uhh... Yes, there are calculations to double- and triple-check. Many calculations. Perhaps you could seek out these Convectors in Skyrim ruins? I can even teach you the spell to heat them.
Just place the soul gem inside, and heat the Convector. At least three seconds. You'll almost certainly need to find multiple Convectors. I suspect it may be due to the nature of the soul gem versus the crystals this was intended for. Destroys the equipment in the process.
But, ahh... It's effective. Three times, and the crystal should be ready for the next step. Isn't this exciting?

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Brenuin. I am a drunk. Bannered Mare is a location. Bannered Mare is an inn. Argonian Ale is an object. Argonian Ale is special ale. 
I'm drunk only if I can help it. But damn if I ain't almost sober.
Hey. In the Bannered Mare, there's this bottle of Argonian Ale. The good stuff. Get it for me. They won't even know it's gone. Come on...
Argonian Ale! I can almost taste it! I have something for you. This here healing potion. I, er, "found" it in a temple.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aela the Huntress. I am a fellow member of the Companions. Winterhold is a location. Winterhold is a region. Bleakcoast Cave is a location. Bleakcoast Cave is a beast den in Winterhold. 
The Jarl of Winterhold has asked for our help. It seems that predators have taken up residence in Bleakcoast Cave and have been attacking farmers and travelers.
Someone's got to head out there and take care of the beasts. Get it taken care of right away. Nobody wants a hungry animal left roaming along the roads.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Aela the Huntress. I am a fellow member of the Companions.  is a location. 
Pavo Attius has asked for our help. It seems a predator has invaded his home, and someone needs to clear the beast out.
Be cautious. Beasts are not nearly as predictable as men. Give the thing a quick death.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Medresi Dran. I am a greedy woman. Angarvunde is a location. Medresi Dran is present in Angarvunde. Angarvunde is a location. Angarvunde is an old tomb that is said to hold a treasure that bestows great power on the one who discovers it. 
I'm on the verge of incredible wealth, but my cowardly work force ran at the first sign of danger. We were excavating this old tomb when we opened a chamber full of corpses. The team took one look, turned tail, and ran.
Legend says this tomb holds a treasure that bestows great power on the one who discovers it. Beyond that, not much more is known. Obviously, this treasure will fetch a good deal of gold, and I'm willing to let you share in the reward when we find it.
I'll tell you what. You help me get the treasure and I'll split it with you. First, I need you to clear the main chamber of those restless dead. I'll stay here until you're finished, planning our next move.
With my brains and your brawn, that treasure will soon be mine... uh, ours.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Andurs. I am a priest of Arkay. outside the catacombs is a location. Andurs is present in outside the catacombs.  is a location. 
Perhaps you'll take pity on a humble priest who has lost something precious?
I lost my amulet of Arkay. It's the source of my divine powers and also a sacred badge of office. I misplaced it in the catacombs. I'd look for it, but I've been hearing noises down there. I fear the dead have become... restless. Without that amulet, I'm powerless to confront them.
Would you be willing to search for it? I'll just wait here and make sure nothing foul escapes the catacombs.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tolfdir. I am a mage. Dragonhide is an object. Dragonhide is a protection spell, an improvement on the Ebonyflesh spell. Ebonyflesh is an object. Ebonyflesh is a powerful protection spell. Kahvozein's Fang is an object. Kahvozein's Fang is a sharp dagger. 
I've been working on something. An improvement on the Ebonyflesh spell. I've made progress, but then hit a snag. I think perhaps you could help.
I made some progress using the essence of dragon scales. But they're just not quite potent enough. My knowledge of history is far from complete, but I did some research and discovered two things.
First, there are ancient references to dragon "heartscales". What little I could learn suggests they may be what I need. Second, there are stories of a dagger called Kahvozein's Fang, said to be sharp enough to carve heartscales off a dragon.
First you'll need to retrieve the dagger, then use it to carve a few heartscales off a dragon. Presumably a deceased one.
If my research succeeds, I certainly think you deserve the first copy of the Dragonhide spell tome.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Golldir. I am a man who is afraid of Hillgrund's Tomb. Hillgrund's Tomb is a location. Hillgrund's Tomb is Golldir's family tomb. Agna is present in Hillgrund's Tomb. Agna is Golldir's aunt who raised Golldir. Vals Veran is present in Hillgrund's Tomb. Vals Veran is a dark elf necromancer who has never seen eye to eye with Golldir's family. 
Can you help me? There's a necromancer in the tomb; doing Gods know what with my dead relatives.
The necromancer's called Vals Veran. My family has never really seen eye to eye with him and he has finally gone off the deep end. He's gone in to defile our family tomb by using our ancestors for his filthy dark elf necromancy.
My aunt went in after him, but she hasn't come out yet and I'm afraid to go in by myself. I'm not proud of it. I'm terrified of that place and Aunt Agna knows it. My Da locked me in there in a drunken rage when he left us... three days in there eating the offerings left for our dead before Aunt Agna found me.
I'll unlock the door and meet you inside, then you can lead the way. We should get after Vals Veran before he does more damage here.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Kharjo. I am a caravaner from a warm land. a cold land is a location. Kharjo is present in a cold land. Moon Amulet is a location. Moon Amulet is an amulet. Faldar's Tooth is a location. Faldar's Tooth is a bandit den. 
A few days ago, our caravan was ambushed. A nuisance, really, but many of the marauders had quick fingers.
One of them stole my Moon Amulet, given to me by my mother when I was just a cub. It is my only memory of home in this cold land.
You offer to get my amulet back? We believe the bandits are a part of a group headquartered in Faldar's Tooth. Be careful. I miss my amulet, but a life cannot be replaced as easily.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Paarthurnax. I am a dragon, and the player's ally. Time-Wound is a location. Time-Wound is a hole in time. Elder Scroll is an object. Elder Scroll is a mythological scroll that can bend time itself. 
You have it. The Scroll - the Elder Scroll. Time bends... touch. Time shudders at its touch. There is no question. You are doom-driven. Blessings of Akatosh. The very bones of the earth are at your disposal.
Go then. Fulfill your destiny. Take the Scroll to the Time-Wound. Do not delay. Alduin will be coming. He cannot miss the signs. You must defeat him.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Esbern. I am a member of the Blades. Sky Haven Temple is a location. Sky Haven Temple is an ancient Blades sanctuary, hidden deep in the crags of the Reach. Karthspire is a location. Karthspire is a camp in the Reach. Alduin's Wall is an object. Alduin's Wall is an ancient mural. 
Only a Dragonborn can stop Alduin and avert the end of the world!
But... I don't yet know how you can stop him. But Alduin's Wall does. I hope. It's in Sky Haven Temple, an ancient Blades sanctuary, hidden deep in the crags of the Reach.
Ah, yes. The entrance to Sky Haven Temple seems to be near what's now known as the Karthspire. We'll have to see what we find when we arrive there.
We should be careful. There's no telling what traps and wards the ancient Blades may have set.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 Wheat is an object. Wheat is an alchemy ingredient. Blisterwort is an object. Blisterwort is an alchemy ingredient. 
You know how to use an alchemy lab right? Mix a couple of ingredients together, see what happens.
A little Wheat and Blisterwort makes a healing potion, if you didn't know. There's plenty of ingredients for sale, too.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Tolfdir. I am a professor at the College of Winterhold. College of Winterhold is a location. College of Winterhold is a college for mages. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Markarth is a location. Markarth is a part of Skyrim. Jarl is present in Markarth. Jarl is the nobleman who rules over Markarth. Eye of Magnus is an object. Eye of Magnus is a powerful artifact that was held at the College of Winterhold. Staff of Magnus is an object. Staff of Magnus is a powerful staff that can contain energy from the Eye of Magnus. 
There is something you should be aware of, Arch-Mage. We've been contacted by the Jarl of Markarth. It would seem there's some sort of disturbance.
From what few details we were given, it sounds quite familiar. I suspect that the power released by the Eye of Magnus was not fully contained, and has coalesced in this part of Skyrim. I do hope you still have the Staff of Magnus someplace. I suspect you're going to need it to contain the power.
I'm sure the Jarl will be quite pleased to. I think it only fitting that the Arch-Mage personally receive a large portion of the reward.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Fura Bloodmouth. I am a fellow vampire. Haemar's Shame is a location. Haemar's Shame is a cave. 
A bunch of feral vampires are running wild, upsetting the mortals. When the prey is riled, it makes things difficult for us.
Go cull the brutish beasts in Haemar's Shame before the problem gets out of hand. At first you may pity the thin-bloods. But after disposing of a few, you realize they aren't worth the worry.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Gunmar. I am a fellow vampire hunter. Movarth's Lair is a location. Movarth's Lair is a vampire lair. 
I've discovered the whereabouts of a vampire lair at Movarth's Lair.
Destroying the head vampire is usually sufficient to scatter its minions, though it's best to destroy every last one of them.
I suspect there's more wherever he came from. We cannot afford to relax.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Serana. I am the player's ally. Castle Volkihar is a location. Castle Volkihar is a castle, and the home of Serana's family.  is a location. Elder Scrolls is an object. Elder Scrolls is mysterious, powerful scrolls. 
That Moth Priest, Dexion. He said we needed two other Elder Scrolls. I think I know where we can start looking. We need to find my mother, Valerica. She'll definitely know where one of the Scrolls is, and if we're lucky, she actually has it herself.
The last time I saw her, she said that she'd go somewhere safe... somewhere that my father would never search. Other than that, she wouldn't tell me anything. But the way she said it... "someplace he would never search." It was cryptic, yet she called attention to it.
Wait... There's a courtyard in Castle Volkihar. I used to help her tend a garden there. All of the ingredients for our potions came from there. She used to say that my father couldn't stand the place. Too... peaceful. I don't think we'll actually trip over her there. But it's worth a look.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sorine Jurard. I am a fellow member of the Dawnguard. 
These vampires are a new threat, and a truly deadly one. Gunmar and I agree that we're going to need Florentius to help.
Gunmar and I have a lot of work to do here, so we were hoping that maybe you could track him down. He's a priest of Arkay. Well, he was. It's... it's complicated. Florentius's a little eccentric, but we can trust him and we could definitely use his skills.
Here's the thing. We don't know where Florentius is. Haven't seen him in years. I think he had regular contact with the Vigilants, and I know Isran kept track of them... So maybe you could ask Isran if he knows anything?
Just keep in mind that Isran... well, he might not like the idea. The two of them just never got along.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Garan Marethi. I am a fellow vampire. Bloodstone Chalice is an object. Bloodstone Chalice is a chalice that is able to increase the potency of the player's vampiric powers. 
Lord Harkon. Remember your place. Now, he wants the Chalice, then.
You've heard of the Bloodstone Chalice? The Chalice has been in Lord Harkon's possession for quite some time now. It is, when used properly, able to increase the potency of our powers.
Lord Harkon has neglected using the Chalice for ages. If he wants it filled now, then grander things are afoot. This is good.
Follow me. I'll take you to the Bloodstone Chalice.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Isran. I am the player's leader in the Dawnguard. Dimhollow Crypt is a location. Dimhollow Crypt is an ancient crypt. Tolan is present in Dimhollow Crypt. Tolan is a male member of the Vigilants of Stendarr. 
I need someone out in the field, taking the fight to the damn vampires, while we're getting the fort back into shape...
Go see what the vampires were looking for in Dimhollow Crypt. With any luck, they'll still be there. Here, you should take a crossbow. Good for hunting out those fiends before they get too close.
Tolan'll meet you at Dimhollow. He will try to assist you. Watch out. Vigilants of Stendarr were never trained for vampire hunting...

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Sorine Jurard. I am a fellow member of the Dawnguard, and an avid tinkerer. Irkngthand is a location. Irkngthand is a Dwemer ruin. 
I want to add some punch to our crossbow capabilities, I've done all I can on my own. I need a little inspiration. I've always been fascinated with Dwemer artifacts. I take them apart, poke around in their guts, and try to figure things out - with mixed results.
But as luck would have it, I've tracked down the location of some actual Dwemer diagram drawings! So, if you'd be a dear and collect those plans for me at Irkngthand?
With the Dwemer diagrams and a little tinkering I should be able to improve the capabilities of our crossbows.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Feran Sadri. I am a fellow vampire. Cold Rock Pass is a location. Cold Rock Pass is a cave. Bloodstone Chalice is an object. Bloodstone Chalice is a chalice that is able to increase the potency of the player's vampiric powers. 
I've been performing a little research on the Bloodstone Chalice. I believe we can prolong its salutary effects if we infuse it with potent vampiric blood.
I've located the petrified remains of an elder vampire in Cold Rock Pass. Bring them to me, and I should be able to extend the effects granted by the Bloodstone Chalice.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Serana. I am a cautious woman. Castle Volkihar is a location. Castle Volkihar is Serana's family's home, on an island to the west of Solitude. Solitude is a location. Solitude is a city. 
That's... complicated. And I'm not totally sure if I can trust you. But if you want to know the whole story, help me get back to my family's home.
My family used to live on an island to the west of Solitude. Not the most welcoming place, but depending on whose around, I'll be safe there. My father and I don't really get along. Ugh, saying it out loud makes it sound so... common. "Little girl who doesn't get along with her father." Read that story a hundred times.
Hopefully we can find a boat to take us to my family's home.

This is a quest from The Elder Scrolls: Skyrim
 I am Harkon. I am the lord of the vampires. Castle Volkihar is a location. Harkon is present in Castle Volkihar. Skyrim is a location. Skyrim is a realm. Castle Volkihar is a location. Castle Volkihar is a castle ruled by Harkon. 
I am Harkon, lord of this court. By now, my daughter will have told you what we are. We are among the oldest and most powerful vampires in Skyrim.
You have done me a great service, and now you must be rewarded. There is but one gift I can give that is equal in value to the Elder Scroll and my daughter.
I offer you my blood. Take it, and you will walk as a lion among sheep. Men will tremble at your approach, and you will never fear death again.
However, if you refuse my gift you will be prey, like all mortals. I will spare your life this once, but you will be banished from this hall.
I await your decision.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Baldrick the Enchanter. I am a mage who sells enchantments. Baldrick the Enchanter's store is a location. Baldrick the Enchanter is present in Baldrick the Enchanter's store. Path of the Honored Dead is a location. Path of the Honored Dead is a pass. Beornen is present in Path of the Honored Dead. Beornen is a male bear-mage with enchanting tools. 
Welcome! Welcome, my friend. I have numerous enchantments available... weapons, armor, trinkets, and the like. Or, rather, I would, if I hadn't lost my enchantment kit!
Maybe you can help me. I've heard there's a Beornen shaman or something out in the Path of the Honored Dead, who has the kind of enchanting tools I need. If you could locate this bear-mage and acquire those tools, I would happily give you your first enchantment, free of charge!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Bellethe. I am a worried wife, and a passionate animal owner. Estherian Enclave is a location. Estherian Enclave is a town. Widow's Veil is a location. Widow's Veil is a cave inhabited by nasty creatures. Finnas is present in Widow's Veil. Finnas is Bellethe's husband. 
Please, help me! Our dear little ones wandered into that cave! My husband Finnas ventured after them, but it is crawling with nasty creatures, and he hasn't returned!
My husband Finnas and I were on our way to the Estherian Enclave. We're homesteaders, with a small farm in the Frosted Hills. The weather is getting harsh, so we were making one last run for supplies before winter. Oh, I'm beside myself with worry! Please, find Finnas and our precious babies! You have to help us! You could have a special item as a token of our gratitude!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Blair. I am a researcher, giving quest via "Blair's Notes". Norsk Leiren is a location. Blair is present in Norsk Leiren. Norsk Leiren is a location. Norsk Leiren is a cold, icy dungeon. Bennings is present in Norsk Leiren. Bennings is one of Blair's fellow researchers. Fuchs is present in Norsk Leiren. Fuchs is one of Blair's fellow researchers. Thing are a dangerous parasitic, infectious creature. Thing are enemies. "Blair's Notes" is an object. "Blair's Notes" is notes on the discovery of the Thing. 
"Blair's Notes"
by Blair

It was in the ice. Who knows how long? But it wasn't dead. And now it's hiding, here somewhere... in one of us. We found it in Bennings, but then Fuchs disappeared. It's still here, and it's looking for a way out. If it gets out into the world, it can infect everyone, everywhere. Three years, at most. Gods forgive us for what we've set loose upon the world.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Commander Vale. I am the leader of the Vanquisher Corps, giving quest via "Bounty Board". Temple Steppes is a location. Temple Steppes is a grassland plain. Sturmbeorn are savage raiders attacking the Estherians and the settlers of the Empire. Sturmbeorn are enemies. "Bounty Board" is an object. "Bounty Board" is a bounty board. 
BOUNTY!
The Sturmbeorn raiders are a threat to the Estherians and to the brave settlers of the Empire. Commander Vale is authorized to pay a reward to anyone who assists the Vanquisher Corps in ridding the Temple Steppes of these savage brutes.
This bounty shall be paid to anyone who slays 10 or more Sturmbeorn in the Temple Steppes.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Commander Vale. I am the leader of the Vanquisher Corps, giving quest via "Bounty Board". Estheria is a location. Estheria is a country. Temple Steppes is a location. Temple Steppes is a region in Estheria. Warbeasts are dangerous monsters. Warbeasts are enemies. "Bounty Board" is an object. "Bounty Board" is a bounty board. 
BOUNTY!
Commander Vale of the Vanquisher Corps is offering a reward to anyone who can help thin out the packs of Warbeasts hampering colonization and defense efforts in Estheria.
This reward shall be paid to anyone who slays 10 or more Warbeasts in the Temple Steppes.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Cacklespit. I am a potion-selling witch. Blightbogs is a location. Cacklespit is present in Blightbogs. Blightbogs is a location. Blightbogs is a bog. Mask of a Murderer is an object. Mask of a Murderer is an alchemy ingredient. Thorns as Hard as Iron is an object. Thorns as Hard as Iron is an alchemy ingredient. Black Heart of a Coward is an object. Black Heart of a Coward is an alchemy ingredient. 
Another customer for one of old Cacklespit's brews, eh? I can provide a special concoction, free of charge...if you aren't afraid to get your hands a little dirty.
As any true cook will tell you, the finest ingredients are of the utmost importance if you want to create something truly special. I will require three items to brew the special mixture I have in mind...
The Mask of a Murderer, Thorns as Hard as Iron, and the Black Heart of a Coward.
All three are to be found here in the bogs - you only have to find them!
Once I brew the ingredients properly, your name will be known for generations to come!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Cam. I am a researcher the player has helped before. Rivenskull Gorge is a location. Rivenskull Gorge is a region. Forgotten Halls is a location. Forgotten Halls is an ancient dungeon. Vyrax's Tower is a location. Vyrax is present in Vyrax's Tower. Vyrax is an ancient dragon who has hoarded treasure. 
Hello again! I think I may be able to repay the favor you've done for us.
I've been doing some research, and have uncovered some interesting information about Vyrax, the ancient dragon who still dwells in the tower in Rivenskull Gorge.
The interesting bit is this - Vyrax has amidst his hoard a Heartfire Stone, which confers to its wielder the power of dragonfire. It is a rare and powerful artifact that would surely aid you.
If you wish to find the Heartfire Stone, you will need to first claim the key to Vyrax's Tower, in the depths of the Forgotten Halls.
Good luck!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Clive. I am a botanist working for the Empire. Muckery is a location. Muckery is a fungal cave. Ember Truffles is an object. Ember Truffles is Ember-infused mushrooms. 
I'm a botanist, serving the Empire by gathering various Ember-infused plants.  And I've found a virtual treasure trove of Ember Truffles, down in the Muckery... but some of them have already attained sentience, and that's making it difficult for me to gather them.
If you can bring me, say, a dozen Ember Truffles, I'll keep ten for the Empire, and I'll use the other two to make a Super Mana Potion for you.
Do we have a deal?

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Eldrayn. I am a local leader. Wellspring Temple is a location. Wellspring Temple is a temple. Commander Vale is present in Wellspring Temple. Commander Vale is a female military leader. Guardian of Water is present in Wellspring Temple. Guardian of Water is a powerful being upholding peace. 
Commander Vale believes that the Alchemist might attack the Wellspring Temple, in an attempt to reach the Guardian of Water ... for what nefarious purpose I am afraid to speculate. There has been no word from either Vale, or the Guardian.
Scout the Wellspring Temple, and determine if the Guardian of Water is in any danger.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian of Water. I am a powerful spirit of nature who was attacked by the Alchemist, one of the Guardians. Estherian Enclave is a location. Estherian Enclave is a settlement. 
The Alchemist must be stopped before he attacks any more Guardians! Each time he siphons off our energy, he becomes more dangerous.
You and Commander Vale should return the Estherian Enclave, and plan your next move.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Commander Vale. I am a military leader. Ossean Wastes is a location. Ossean Wastes is a large desert. Ordrak's Heart is an object. Ordrak's Heart is a destructive artifact. 
I don't know if the Alchemist understands that Ordrak's Heart is wreaking such havoc... or if he just doesn't care! I hope there's still a chance to stop him, one way or another, before it's too late.
So the Guardian wants you to head to the Ossean Wastes? You know what? I think I can help you with that...

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Commander Vale. I am a human military leader. Watchweald Temple is a location. Watchweald Temple is a temple. Crows' Pass is a location. Crows' Pass is a pass. Frosted Hills is a location. Frosted Hills is hills. 
This plague seems to specifically target beings of an inherently magical nature, such as the Estherians. So far it's not affecting humans, so I've sent for a transport to bring us some medical supplies, and I'll be coordinating the medical relief here.
Meanwhile, you need to get out to the Watchweald Temple. Take Crows' Pass to the Frosted Hills. Try to catch up to the Grand Regent before he enters the temple.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Destroyer. I am a male hero. Torchlight is a location. Torchlight is a town. Enclave is a location. Enclave is the home of the Estherians. Commander Vale is present in Enclave. Commander Vale is a woman, an old friend to the Destroyer. 
Someone needs to warn the Estherians. Head up the pass to their Enclave. Find my old friend, Commander Vale, and let her know what happened.
Tell them that the Alchemist destroyed Torchlight, and is headed their way. He may be there already...

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Dilawar. I am a Zeraphi soldier. Zeryphesh is a location. Dilawar is present in Zeryphesh. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a city inhabited by Zeraphi. Undercurrents is a location. Undercurrents is a sewer in Zeryphesh, inhabited by poisonous creatures. "Manatoxin" is an object. "Manatoxin" is a poison designed to disrupt Zeraphi physiology, created by Ezrohir. 
My friend, I need your help! My squad and I had observed a group of Ezrohir moving in and out of the Undercurrents. They have installed machines to pump a virulent poison into the city's water supply. Their "Manatoxin" is specifically designed to disrupt Zeraphi physiology. Unfortunately, the noxious atmosphere seems to have attracted a horde of poisonous beasts, and I only just escaped with my life. If you can enter the Undercurrents and destroy those machines for me, I will reward you. What do you say?
I won't lie to you: Destroying those machines won't be simple... but it's vital, and you're the only one who can do it.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Duros the Blade. I am a gambler from Zeryphesh. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a town. 
Finally saved! Thank you! You look like a person who likes risk! I'm heading back to town now. Meet me there and see if your luck holds out!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Edovar. I am a spirit of an ambitious thief. Wellspring Basin is a location. Wellspring Basin is a temple. Glyph of Balthazar is an object. Glyph of Balthazar is an artifact that has power over water. 
I am merely spirit, but I mean you no harm. In life, I was an ambitious thief, and I thought I was invincible. My greatest achievement was when I stole the Glyph of Balthazar from the Wellspring Basin. I thought I could master its power over water, but I was very, very wrong.
Now I am trapped here in eternal torment, drowning forever, unable to rectify my mistake. Will you return the Glyph of Balthazar to the Wellspring Basin, and set my spirit free at last?

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Elder Josimon. I am a man.  is a location. Kidrik the Mauler is present in the underground slave den. Kidrik the Mauler is the male leader of the slavers. 
Kidrik the Mauler must have slipped away during the attack, and concealed himself in the underground slave den! And, if the captives are there, as well, Kidrik must be holding them hostage!
You must defeat Kidrik and free the captives, or all that has been done to stop the slavers will have been for naught!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Elder Josimon. I am a man from the Enclave. Slavers' Camp is a location. Elder Josimon is present in Slavers' Camp. Frosted Hills is a location. Frosted Hills is hills. Slavers' Camp is a location. Slavers' Camp is home of the slavers who have been harassing the Estherians, in the Frosted Hills. 
Thank you for rescuing me. I had recovered the Passkey Ember from these slavers, but they captured me as I was trying to return to the Enclave.
I could use your help with one small matter before you go. These slavers have been harrying the Estherians for several weeks now. You defeated many, but there are many more watching us from the safety of those huts. Burn them out! If they are allowed to remain, the Frosted Hills will never be safe.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Elder Valin. I am a man who was planning to enter the Watchweald Portal. Watchweald Portal is a location. Watchweald Portal is a portal in the Old Estherian Refuge. Old Estherian Refuge is a location. Old Estherian Refuge is an area. Ember Keys is an object. Ember Keys is the keys that are used to open the Watchweald Portal. Passkey Ember is an object. Passkey Ember is one of the Ember Keys. Latchkey Ember is an object. Latchkey Ember is one of the Ember Keys. 
I was planning to enter the Watchweald Portal in the Old Estherian Refuge. Unfortunately the keys have been stolen. Goblin miners took one, and we believe that some slavers who recently moved into the area have the other. It takes both keys to activate the Watchweald Portal... and it is beyond my abilities to retrieve them.
Recover the Passkey Ember from the slavers, and the Latchkey Ember from the goblins. You can use them to open the Portal in the Refuge.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Estherian Spectre. I am a ghost of a man who is bound to the Rotting Crypt. near the altars in the Rotting Crypt is a location. Estherian Spectre is present in near the altars in the Rotting Crypt.  is a location. Rotting Crypt is a location. Rotting Crypt is a crypt. Locket is an object. Locket is a locket Jessa seeks. 
I am bound to this place, and may not pass beyond the threshold. 
If you seek my remains, you must find the Sanguine Gems - they may be found in the depths beyond. Place them upon these altars, and the path to the Wraith Lord will be revealed.
If you can best him, you will discover my remains there - and the Locket Jessa seeks.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Fade. I am an immortal spirit who covets the remains of the living. Sundered Battlefield is a location. Fade is present in Sundered Battlefield. Cacklespit's Realm is a location. Cacklespit's Realm is a hidden realm. Sundered Battlefield is a location. Sundered Battlefield is an ancient battleground. skulls of famous warriors is an object. 
I am Fade - why have you summoned me?
Ah, you want to enter Cacklespit's hidden realm. Yes, I know the way - but I do not provide service without compensation.
I have very particular... appetites. The remains of the living are infused with a lingering residue of deeds past, which sustains me. Bring me the skulls of four warriors of renown, and I will take you where you wish to go. This battlefield is littered with the bones of great heroes. Your search should not be difficult.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Fazeer Shah. I am a djinni. Lamp of Marvels is an object. Lamp of Marvels is a djinni lamp. 
Well, well. You are much more determined... and capable... than I had suspected! Excellent...
Now, to your final task. If you truly wish to free the Guardian, you must humiliate my old rival, Ezrek Khan, by stealing his precious Lamp of Marvels.
Be warned: Ezrek Khan draws his power from the same source as the Netherim. His realm borders closely on theirs; they will almost certainly stand against you, should you challenge the djinni.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Fazeer Shah. I am a djinni. Sadwa Mesa is a location. Sadwa Mesa is a mesa. Lamp of Wonders is an object. Lamp of Wonders is a djinni lamp. 
The Artificer and the Alchemist might be formidable, but even their combined powers are nothing more than parlor tricks to one such as me. I can easily undo anything that they have done to your "Guardian." I will of course require something in return.
My only real enemy in this desert is boredom. I will make you a bargain: Perform three tasks for my amusement. If your struggles provide suitable entertainment, then, and only then, will I free your Guardian.
Your first task: Journey to the Sadwa Mesa, and recover my Lamp of Wonders from the Tu'tara!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Fazeer Shah. I am a djinni. Portal is a location. Portal is a portal to another place. 
You survived the Tu'tara more or less in one piece. Congratulations. But it occurs to me that you didn't do anything that you wouldn't ordinarily have done. This second task should prove much more amusing.
Step through the Portal. Your second task... is to survive!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Felicia. I am a woman. 
You seem weary - perhaps you are in need of a fresh perspective. If you so desire, I can allow you to retrace your steps with all of the knowledge you currently possess. Simply ask, and I can show you the way!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Finnas. I am a grateful man who injured his leg. 
You ... you came to rescue us?  Thank the guardians!
I've managed to keep Snowbell and Sunbeam safe up here, but I injured my leg. I can't make my way out of this cave while carrying them. If you'll take them to Bellethe, I'll follow you out at my own pace. Tell Bellethe that I'm okay. My thanks to you for your help!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Grom. I am a peerless killer. Arena of Slaughter is a location. Grom is present in Arena of Slaughter. Arena of Slaughter is a location. Arena of Slaughter is Grom's bloodstained arena. 
So... you come seeking the wealth of Grom? My spoils are vast, and have no peer in this realm.
There is no path to success for you, lest you survive my arena and prove your worth.
Be forewarned - many have tested their mettle on this bloodstained floor, but none have yet succeeded. Their souls are now mine, and they do as they are bid.
Will you attempt the challenge? I will await your decision.
None have yet triumphed within the walls of my arena.
Perhaps you will be the first?
Perhaps...

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 
We must act quickly. It appears that the Artificer you defeated in the Vaults has enslaved the Guardian of Mana for the enemy. The most pressing danger is that they will use the enslaved Guardian to corrupt... and control... all the world's magic. Our only recourse in that event may be to destroy the Guardian.
There might still be hope. If we can find a way to free the Guardian from Ezrohir's control, we can thwart the Alchemist's plans.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 Riftkeep is a location. Riftkeep is a nearby fortress that was designated as a neutral ground, where the Zeraphi and the Ezrohir could meet and talk over their differences, now occupied by the Ezrohir. Guardian of Mana is present in Riftkeep. Guardian of Mana is a powerful spirit. 
When the Zeraphi and Ezrohir "parted ways," they designated the nearby fortress of Riftkeep as a neutral ground, where they could meet and talk over their differences. But it has remained unused for centuries... until a few weeks ago, when the Ezrohir army seized the fortress. They have occupied it ever since, and that is surely where they are holding the Guardian of Mana while they marshal their forces.
The Ezrohir will be expecting the Zeraphi to attack them at Riftkeep, to attempt to rescue the Guardian. But they know it will take time for the Zeraphi to arrive. You can get there much more quickly, and fight your way inside before they are prepared to repel you.
Go. Fight past the Ezrohir and free the Guardian!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian Of Air. I am an immortal spirit. Salt Barrens is a location. Salt Barrens is a desert. Fazeer Shah is present in Salt Barrens. Fazeer Shah is a male djinni. a dark realm is a location. Ezrek Khan is present in a dark realm. Ezrek Khan is a male djinni. 
Centuries ago, a djinni named Fazeer Shah and a djinni named Ezrek Khan quarreled over some trivial matter, and ultimately went to war. They caused considerable damage to the cities, and devastated the land, until the Zeraphi sultan had had enough. He banished them both: one to the desert, and one to... another place; a dark realm.
If you can reach Fazeer Shah, you might be able to convince him to help us.
You must travel out into the Salt Barrens to locate Fazeer Shah.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian Of Air. I am one of the Guardians. Grunnheim is a location. Grunnheim is a haunted forest.  is an object. 
Let us return to the matter of the Dark Alchemist. He has now stolen the energy of three Guardians, and we thought he desired my power as well. But, for some reason, he has left the desert, and is now en route to Grunnheim.
That can only mean that he is bound for the Clockwork Core. With the power he has amassed, he could destroy the barrier between our world and the realm of the Netherim. They would pour through by the millions.
Seek the Railmaster, and depart for Grunnheim as soon as you are able.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian of Air. I am a powerful spirit. Forsaken Vaults is a location. Forsaken Vaults is hidden archives. Alchemist is present in Forsaken Vaults. Alchemist is an evil man. Guardian of Mana is present in Forsaken Vaults. Guardian of Mana is a powerful female spirit who is pursuing the Alchemist. Sphinx is present in Forsaken Vaults. Sphinx is the guardian of the Forsaken Vaults. 
I have been expecting you. I am the Guardian of Air.
The Guardian of Mana has pursued the Alchemist into the Forsaken Vaults, which are guarded by the Sphinx. Seek the Vaults, and convince the Sphinx to grant you entry. The Guardian of Mana is in great danger... if not from the Alchemist, then from the Netherim. Save her.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian Of Mana. I am the player's ally. Ordrak's Heart is an object. Ordrak's Heart is a powerful relic infused with the energy stolen from the Guardians. Clockwork Core is an object. Clockwork Core is a device that upholds the barriers between the worlds. 
You must overtake the Alchemist before he reaches the Clockwork Core. With the power of Ordrak's Heart, he could destroy the barrier between the worlds, which would mean the end of everything.
You must defeat the Alchemist and seize the Heart. He intends to use it for destruction, but, infused with the energy stolen from the Guardians, it now has the power to restore the Clockwork Core, and repair the damage to the barrier.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian of Mana. I am a powerful spirit. Riftkeep is a location. Guardian of Mana is present in Riftkeep. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a city. Riftkeep is a location. Riftkeep is a fortress. 
Stop. Enough. You have freed me from my enslavement and I am myself once more!
We must leave this place. I will open a portal for you, to Zeryphesh.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guardian of the Wild. I am one of the Guardians, drained by the Alchemist. Ossean Wastes is a location. Ossean Wastes is a desert. Enclave is a location. Enclave is a settlement. Commander Vale is present in Enclave. Commander Vale is a female military leader. 
I fear the Alchemist is a pawn of the Netherim. With the power of the Guardians, a portal to the Nether Realm could be thrown wide, and the world would be plunged into an age of never-ending torment.
Return to the Enclave immediately. Commander Vale can help you secure passage to the Ossean Wastes, where two of my fellow Guardians can be found. Stop the Alchemist before he can drain them as well!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Hareph. I am a relieved Zeraphi master of explosives. an outpost is a location. Hareph is present in an outpost. Swarm Point is a location. Swarm Point is a Skara nest. 
I'm so relieved you have arrived! My crew and I journeyed to this outpost to deal with the increasingly aggressive Skara.
I remained here to fashion additional explosives while my crew investigated the stacks, but they never returned. I have been unable to leave here because of the swarming Skara.
Please take these explosives with you and journey to Swarm Point, and search for any surviving Zeraphi and help them in any way you can!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am High Priest Tauna. I am the head priest of the temple. a safe place is a location. High Priest Tauna is present in a safe place.  is a location. Bronze Head of Grunnheim is an object. Bronze Head of Grunnheim is an artifact that contains records, some of which are the only accounts of major historic events. 
We are relatively safe here, but the brutish Sturmbeorn will surely destroy everything that isn't made of gold! The temple is home to thousands of years of historical artifacts and documents, and it grieves me immeasurably to think of all of those treasures lost!
We were able to gather up some of the artifacts, as we fled, but the Bronze Head of Grunnheim was left behind! Please, find it! Some of its records are the only accounts we have of major historic events!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 Watchweald Temple is a location. Watchweald Temple is a temple swept by a plague that transforms priests into Nether-Thralls. Nether-Thralls are demonic creatures. Nether-Thralls are enemies. 
Thank the Gods you are here! A plague is sweeping through the Watchweald Temple, transforming the temple priests into Nether-Thralls! Several uninfected priests are still inside, trapped by the Nether-Thralls. I can protect them, if I can reach them... or if they can reach me.
Look for places where the temple priests may have hidden from the Nether-Thralls, and send them back here. Once they are all safe, we can focus on aiding the Guardian of the Wild.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Imperial Railmaster. I am a transporter. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a town a couple of days travel away from here. Embercraft is a location. Embercraft is a transportation device. 
You're the one the Vanquisher lady told me about, then? Alright... whenever you're ready to get rollin', we'll get your gear aboard our Embercraft, and we'll set out to Zeryphesh. Shouldn't take us more than a couple of days to get there!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Hoska. I am Hareph's only surviving crew member. Swarm Point is a location. Hoska is present in Swarm Point. Swarm Point is a location. Swarm Point is a Skara nest. Brood Hive is a location. Brood Hive is the innermost part of the Swarm Point. 
Ah, Hareph sent you with some explosives. Finally some good news!
Don't bother looking for the rest of the crew - I'm the only one that survived. 
There's something wrong with some of the Skara hives - they seem to be infected. You'll need to locate the rigged hives and detonate them, then descend into the Brood Hive itself and destroy any infected eggs you find. Perhaps you will discover what has been blighting the eggs!
This is a great task, but it must be done. We will all be in your debt.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Imperial Trapper. I am a ranger working towards the Imperial colonization effort. Bone Defile is a location. Bone Defile is a region.  is a location. 
I've been charged with culling the Warbeasts here, for the Imperial colonization effort. I can keep their population down, but something is driving them wild, almost like they're rabid or something.
Can you get into the Warbeast den, in the Bone Defile, and get rid of whatever's making them so vicious?

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Forgotten Hero. I am a ghost of a long-dead hero. Crows' Pass is a location. Crows' Pass is a pass. Spectral Champions are ghosts of champions. Spectral Champions are enemies. 
I have been dead a very long time, and in all those centuries, I have not found one soul worthy of taking up the mantle of hero, as I once did, and seeking adventure.
Will you be that hero? I offer you five challenges. Defeat each of the five Spectral Champions in Crows' Pass: these ghostly champions will be your challenges. Should you master them all, my most prized possession is yours...

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Jadok. I am a man who knows the player. Icedeep Caverns is a location. Jadok is present in Icedeep Caverns. Torchlight is a location. Torchlight is a town. Icedeep Caverns is a location. Icedeep Caverns is icy caverns where dangerous creatures dwell. Alchemist's Journals is an object. Alchemist's Journals is a series of journals written by the Alchemist. Ordrak's Heart is an object. Ordrak's Heart is a dangerous artifact. 
Your arrival is well-timed. I believe I have located the Alchemist's lair, here in the Icedeep Caverns. I found a Journal just inside the entrance; it speaks of entering the mine at Torchlight and retrieving Ordrak's Heart. I intended to look for more, further inside the icy caverns, but the creatures dwelling there now are too much for me.
Finding the rest of the Alchemist's Journals would probably be very helpful in ascertaining how to stop him. The one I saw was volume four, so there are probably three more in the Icedeep Caverns.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Jasha. I am a worried friend. Salt Barrens is a location. Salt Barrens is a desolate region. Swarm Stacks is a location. Swarm Stacks is Skara's nesting place north of here, out in the Salt Barrens. Hareph is present in Swarm Stacks. Hareph is a man, and Jasha's missing friend. 
If you're heading out into the Salt Barrens, could you find out what happened to my companion Hareph?
He left with a crew to determine why the Skara have become so aggressive lately, but no one has come back.
If you travel North to the Swarm Stacks, you should be able to find him - or at least what happened to him.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Jessa. I am a sorrowful daughter. Blightbogs is a location. Jessa is present in Blightbogs. Blightbogs is a location. Blightbogs is a swamp. Locket is an object. Locket is a memento of Jessa's father. 
Oh, my poor father - I cannot believe that he is gone! Dear father...
Please try to retrieve the Locket - it belonged to my father. I cannot bear to think that it is lost in this foul place, corroding away in swamp water. He must have dropped it somewhere around here...

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Jessa. I am an anxious woman from Estheria. Jessa and her father's camp is a location. Jessa is present in Jessa and her father's camp. Estheria is a location. Estheria is a country. Temple is a location. Temple is a temple in Estheria.  is a location. Wraithring is an object. Wraithring is an ancient artifact which is said to have power over death. 
Please, traveler! Wait a moment! I am Jessa - a traveler from Estheria. My father and I came to this place to recover an ancient artifact - the Wraithring - which is said to have power over death itself. We sought to bring it to the Temple for study.
My father entered the catacombs while I tended our camp - but he has not returned, and there are dark things stirring below.
Please - I only ask that you discover his fate - perhaps he is wounded and only needs aid to escape!
If the worst comes to pass... he wears a locket around his neck, and you will know him by it.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Lord Taldimut. I am the player's old friend, who promised the player a a greater reward if the player came to visit him in Ossean Wastes. Ossean Wastes is a location. Lord Taldimut is present in Ossean Wastes. Ossean Wastes is a location. Ossean Wastes is a desert. Celestial Armory is a location. Celestial Armory is Lord Taldimut's armory that houses some of the finest weapons. Armory Portal is an object. Armory Portal is a hidden portal to the Celestial Armory. 
It's good to see you again, my friend! I know that I promised you a greater reward, should you come to visit... but that was before I returned to the Ossean Wastes and found the Celestial Armory under siege by Ezrohir.
What if I give you your choice of artifacts from the Armory? The Celestial Armory houses some of the finest weapons in the world! You have but to use the Golden Gear to get inside, then activate the Armory Portal, which will allow us to gather up the weapons and armor safely... with the Ezrohir none the wiser!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Lord Taldimut. I am a man from Zeryphesh. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a city sieged by Ezrohir. Whispering Cave is a location. Whispering Cave is a deep cave. Golden Gear is an object. Golden Gear is important object related to defense of Zeryphesh. 
I have continued studying the crests, and I am more convinced than ever that the Golden Gear is hidden in the the Whispering Cave. If you can retrieve it, I can bring it back to Zeryphesh, to aid in the city's defense against the Ezrohir siege.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Lord Taldimut. I am a Zeraphi ambassador, the leader of the Zeraphi envoy. Frosted Hills is a location. Lord Taldimut is present in Frosted Hills. Frosted Hills is a location. Frosted Hills is frozen hills. Golden Gear is an object. Golden Gear is important object related to defense of Zeraphi. crests, created by the Estherians, together form a map that shows the exact location of the Golden Gear is an object. 
My friend, thank you for coming to our aid. I am Lord Taldimut, the leader of this Zeraphi envoy, sent to procure the Estherians' aid in our upcoming war with the Ezrohir. Grand Regent Eldrayn gave us leave to search the Frosted Hills for the Golden Gear, and we had narrowed our search to these chilly hills before we were assaulted by these goblins.
Now we are too injured to continue our search. Can you aid us? The exact location of the Golden Gear is long forgotten, but the Estherians created a map from three crests. If you can find those, I can interpret the map and find the Gear! Search the Frosted Hills for the crests. Bring them to me, and I will reward you, on behalf of the Zeraphi people.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Guard. I am a frantic guard. 
Thank the Gods you're here! These... demons just came out of nowhere! I've been able to hold them off so far, but, with you here, we'll soon triumph over them!
Why are you looking at me like that? Can't you see them? They're all around us! Please... you've got to believe me!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 Sundered Battlefield is a location. Sundered Battlefield is an ancient battlefield. Gravedeep is a location. Gravedeep is a pit mine in the Sundered Battlefield. Rift is an object. Rift is a hole between this world and the world of evil, powerful demons. 
Listen: If you're headed out to the Sundered Battlefield, there's something you should know. We were surveying out there, and discovered some kind of... hole, in thin air, in the pit mine we've been calling Gravedeep. The hole is very small, right now, but we could see things inside... powerful things, but horrible. Malign.
If you're going out there, see if you can find the hole. If we're lucky, it disappeared. But, if not, you should do your best to find a way to close it, before the things we saw get through!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Malik Vosh. I am a friendly Zeraphi nobleman. Zeryphesh is a location. Malik Vosh is present in Zeryphesh. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a large city inhabited by the Zeraphi. Riftkeep is a location. Riftkeep is the stronghold of the Ezrohir. Ossean Wastes is a location. Ossean Wastes is a large desert. Commander Muzaffar is present in Ossean Wastes. Commander Muzaffar is the military leader of the Zeraphi, captured by the Ezrohir. 
Greetings, my friend! Welcome to Zeryphesh! I am Malik Vosh. I speak for the Zeraphi.
As you know, the Ezrohir are preparing to assault our city. Our military leader, Commander Muzaffar, has apparently been captured by the Ezrohir, out in the Ossean Wastes. They'll have sent for soldiers to take their prisoners back to their stronghold. Once they get him to Riftkeep, they'll identify him quickly enough, and then they'll interrogate him until they know everything about our defenses.
I believe you're going out to the Ossean Wastes, the vast desert. Please, rescue Muzaffar. We need him.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Malo. I am a relieved enchanter. Estherian Enclave is a location. Estherian Enclave is a settlement. 
Oh, thank you so much!  Here I was, afraid I'd never enchant anything ever again!
I'm was on my way to the Estherian Enclave when these brigands ambushed me. Once I gather my wits, I'll head over there. Come by and see me, if you get a chance! I'll have a reward for you.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Mashal. I am a Zeraphi scout. Dead Shoals is a location. Dead Shoals is a deep crevice below Mashal. Crab King is present in Dead Shoals. Crab King is the king of the crabs. 
Your timing is perfect, my friend! Below us, in the Dead Shoals, the Crab King is negotiating with a representative of the Ezrohir, to provide the Ezrohir with a huge cache of scrap metal they have salvaged. The Ezrohir will use that scrap to forge more arms to bring against us! They must be stopped!
I beg you: Go down into the Dead Shoals and prevent the Crab King from concluding his negotiations with the Ezrohir! I realize this is not much in the way of a reward, but this potion is all I can offer.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Medrus. I am a badly injured man.  is a location. Merryweather Leaves is an object. Merryweather Leaves is a healing herb. 
Hello! I thought I heard someone moving around out there.
Listen, my name's Medrus. I got ambushed by some raiders, and managed to get clear... but I got pretty badly injured in the process. I can treat it, but I need some Merryweather Leaves. They grow around here, but I'm too weak to look for them.
Think you can find some for me, bring 'em back here? You'll be rewarded, I promise.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Miamin. I am an Estherian scout. Path of the Honored Dead is a location. Miamin is present in Path of the Honored Dead. Path of the Honored Dead is a location. Path of the Honored Dead is a pass. Corrupted Crypt is a location. Corrupted Crypt is a crypt crawling with the Sturmbeorn in the Path of the Honored Dead. Scroll of Anom-Irek is an object. Scroll of Anom-Irek is a powerful healing scroll. 
You must be the human the other Estherians are speaking of. I am glad to have met you. I have been sent on a quest to recover the Scroll of Anom-Irek, stored in a vault in the Corrupted Crypt, here. The scroll should allow us to heal the Estherians who have been corrupted by evil spirits. Unfortunately, the Sturmbeorn have already entered the crypt, and I have been unable to get past them.
Can I ask you to attempt to retrieve the scroll? I will wait here in the Path of the Honored Dead for your return. Should you succeed, I will see what I can do to provide you with some equipment more fitting a hero of your stature.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Muzaffar. I am the player's friend. Zeryphesh is a location. Muzaffar is present in Zeryphesh. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a city-state located in the Ossean Wastes. Forsaken Vaults is a location. Forsaken Vaults is a dungeon located far out in the Ossean Wastes. Ossean Wastes is a location. Ossean Wastes is a desert. Tower of the Moon is a location. Tower of the Moon is an ancient tower in the Ossean Wastes, near Zeryphesh. 
My friend, I have a mission for you. You may have noticed the Ezrohir activity in the Ossean Wastes. We believe these are scouts operating out of the Forsaken Vaults, but they are appearing so close to the city gates that we think they might have a base much nearer, from which they are spying on us.
We have narrowed down the possibilities, and I want you to look into the Tower of the Moon, an ancient tower jutting from the Ossean Wastes. Determine if there are any Ezrohir scouts there... and if you find any, deal with them.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Nerasis. I am a a researcher working for the Empire. Tarroch's Rift is a location. Tarroch's Rift is a mana-rich area with horrible monsters. Ember is an object. Ember is a magical power source. Spent Ember is an object. Spent Ember is a burned-out Ember. 
Hello there! I wonder if you have a moment to help me out? My name is Nerasis; I'm a researcher for the Empire. I've been working on a theory that used Ember can be recharged, with exposure to a suitably large source of mana. My research led me to Tarroch's Rift, where the mana output ratio is... well, it's very high.
The problem is that there are quite a few horrible monsters between me and the mana source. I would be willing to pay you to take this burned-out Spent Ember into Tarroch's Rift and attempt to charge it, then bring it back here so I can see if my theory is correct.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Olwin. I am a ghost of a man who was betrayed and drowned by his evil companions. Plunder Cove is a location. Plunder Cove is a pirate refuge. Captain Willy is present in Plunder Cove. Captain Willy is the leader of Olwin's murderers, a male ghost pirate. 
I mean you no harm; I am but a lonely soul, trapped in the afterlife. Betrayed and drowned by villainous companions, I dwell here, reliving my end, waiting in vain for my death to be avenged.
But it has been over a hundred years since I took my last breath, and nearly that many since my murderers themselves perished, in their hidden retreat in Plunder Cove. Seek their leader, Captain Willy. Show him that justice has neither forgotten him... nor forgiven him!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Larry. I am a ghost of a former tomb raider, who was left to die by his former accomplices. a desert is a location. Larry is present in a desert. Plunder Cove is a location. Plunder Cove is . Captain Stillheart is present in Plunder Cove. Captain Stillheart is the leader of Larry's former accomplices, a male ghost. 
I was a villain, in my time. I broke into tombs and stole from the dead. But, one day, I realized how much pain I had caused those still living... and I swore it would stop.
My comrades... my accomplices... felt differently. They lured me out into these desolate sands and left me to die. My spirit has haunted this place ever since, bound here by the weight of my sins, hoping for vengeance. But they perished elsewhere, beyond my reach, even though they are now spirits as well. Seek their leader, Captain Stillheart, in Plunder Cove, and show him that justice can still find him!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Professor Stoker. I am the player's ally. next to the entrance to the Broken Mines is a location. Professor Stoker is present in next to the entrance to the Broken Mines. Broken Mines is a location. Broken Mines is mines. Alchemist is present in Broken Mines. Alchemist is the player's desperate male enemy. 
This is the only entrance to the Broken Mines that we've found, so the Alchemist is almost certainly in there. That probably means he's near his goal, whatever that is... and that means he'll do everything he can to keep you from stopping him. He'll be even more desperate, more dangerous.
I don't know what we'll encounter in there.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Professor Stoker. I am an inventor. 
What do we have here?  Wow, this is a 4000 Model robot! These are quite old - this one appears to have had a lot of work done to it. Not sure why it's in pieces - why don't we find out! Let me just put these together for you and we'll see what it has to say for itself.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Professor Stoker. I am the player's ally. Imperial Camp is a location. Professor Stoker is present in Imperial Camp. Great Door is a location. Great Door is a door that leads to the Clockwork Core. Scrapworks is a location. Scrapworks is a dangerous junkyard. Clockwork Core is an object. Clockwork Core is a terrible machine. 
I wish you had gotten here sooner! The Alchemist came through here about an hour ago. He laid waste to the camp and then went through the Great Door, there - sealed it shut behind him.
We believe that door leads to the Clockwork Core. We've been unable to open it ourselves, but we know how in theory. See that dwarven automaton? It's designed to open the door, but it's missing its Power Source. There should be one in the Scrapworks, but it was too dangerous for us to enter. Perhaps you will have more luck.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Professor Stoker. I am an inventor. Emberworks is a location. Emberworks is an ancient dwarwen machine workshop. Rivenskull Pass is a location. Rivenskull Pass is a pass. Sundered Battlefield is a location. Sundered Battlefield is an ancient battlefield. 
Oh, no... I was afraid of this! The Power Source is completely drained! This is going to be more difficult than I'd anticipated. This is only a minor setback. We knew about these Power Sources from our explorations of the Emberworks, on the far side of the Sundered Battlefield. We found machines there that the ancient dwarves once used to craft them. If you can reach the Emberworks, it should be child's play to recharge it.
You'll have to make your way through Rivenskull Pass to reach the battlefield. Once you've charged the Power Source, come back here, and we'll install it in the Automaton.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Retto the Mapper. I am an excited man. Mapworks is a location. Mapworks is a legendary dungeon hub. 
The legendary Mapworks is operational once more! From the Mapworks, you can navigate to all sorts of wondrous places! Many fine adventures surely await you within.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Robot Eye. I am an arrogant person guarding the door. Forgotten Halls is a location. Forgotten Halls is a dungeon. Thiss is present in Forgotten Halls. Thiss is a great spectral dragon who stole the Crown from Robot Eye. Crown is an object. Crown is Robot Eye's family heirloom. 
You want through THIS door? Ha! Well, it's not as simple as that. Everything has a price - you must know that by now.
If you can solve a problem for us, we will solve a problem for you by letting you through the door. Thiss, the great Spectral Dragon, has kept something of ours for many long years. We would like it back - and you will get it for us, oh yes.
There is a Crown, a... family heirloom that he stole from us. He will not give it up easily, of course. But this door is im-PENETRABLE - so you've got a much better chance with Thiss than you do waiting around here.
You can find Thiss in the Forgotten Halls... good luck! You're going to need it.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Selrenki. I am a shady man. near the Bone Gallery is a location. Selrenki is present in near the Bone Gallery.  is a location. Bone Gallery is a location. Bone Gallery is a crypt whose entrance is locked with the Ghost Chains. Ghost Chains is an object. Ghost Chains is chains that only a ghost can open. Rosamortis is an object. Rosamortis is a valuable little item that can save the life of someone who's been mortally wounded. 
I got a proposition for you... a little "I scratch my back, you scratch yours" kind of thing. See this crypt over here? It's called the Bone Gallery, and there's a little thing in there called the Rosamortis... a handy little thingamajig that can save the life of someone who's been mortally wounded... which, while pretty valuable, is also guarded by the biggest undead monstrosity I've ever seen!
Also, the entrance to the Bone Gallery is locked with chains only a ghost can open! You'll have to convince the spirits to unlock the Ghost Chains and give you access, then get the Rosamortis away from that monster... but I promise to make it worth your while!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Sphinx. I am a statue that speaks in riddles. Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a city-state. Vaults Forsaken is a location. Vaults Forsaken is a foul dungeon filled with Ezrohir. Guardian of Mana is present in Vaults Forsaken. Guardian of Mana is a good female spirit. 
The Ezrohir prepare today for war
Their legions number in the score.
Their Alchemy and Artifice suffice
To capture Mana... not once but twice.
Imprisoned in the Vaults Forsaken:
Subdued, enslaved, her magic taken.
Forced to lead their troops in battle
From Guardian... to so much chattel.
The Ezrohir have Mana enslaved
But there's still hope; she might yet be saved.
The enemy lie in this foul creche.
Save the Guardian... save Zeryphesh.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Sphinx. I am the riddle-speaking guardian of the gate. the entrance to the Forsaken Vaults, at a desert is a location. Sphinx is present in the entrance to the Forsaken Vaults, at a desert. Stygian Aerie is a location. Stygian Aerie is a Manticore nest. Manticore are a half drake, a half lion beast. Manticore are enemies. 
My ancient charge, to guard the gate
The desert sands to contemplate.
In Stygian realm lurks beast of yore
Part drake, part lion: Manticore.
Lay its skin before my eyes
And passage through shall be your prize.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Sphinx. I am the guardian of the Forsaken Vaults, speaks in rhymes. the gate to the Forsaken Vaults is a location. Sphinx is present in the gate to the Forsaken Vaults. Forsaken Vaults is a location. Forsaken Vaults is a perilous dungeon. Mana Queen is present in Forsaken Vaults. Mana Queen is a good female spirit. 
The Mana Queen has come and gone
Through this gate, she journeyed on.
Follow her and pay the cost.
Hasten forth, or she'll be lost.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Sprocket. I am a distraught Ponya. Fungal Caves is a location. Fungal Caves is the only place where Blue Boletus grow. Black Blindness is an object. Black Blindness is a disease peculiar to the Ponya, which dims the vision and makes speech impossible permanently after two weeks, can only be cured with Blue Boletus flesh. 
Oh, please - perhaps you can help us! On the advice of our village's healer, I have traveled here seeking a cure. My cousins are afflicted with the Black Blindness, an ailment peculiar to our race.
Black Blindness is an insidious disease - it dims the vision and makes speech impossible, and if not treated within a few weeks, can become permanent. The only known treatment is produced from the flesh of the Blue Boletus - a species of mushroom creatures that grows only in the Fungal Caves near here. I find that they are, ah, BIGGER than I had anticipated, however.
Perhaps YOU could retrieve some Blue Boletus flesh for us? We would be forever in your debt!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Faceless King. I am the former king of the Zeraphi and Ezrohir, an immortal man. Vault of Souls is a location. Vault of Souls is a place where the Faceless King can reunite the Zeraphi and Ezrohir. Royal Masks is an object. Royal Masks is the masks of the royal line, keys to the Vault of Souls. 
I am called the Faceless King, and I have resided here since the Zeraphi and Ezrohir were one race. I was their king. It has been my dream to reunite them by accessing the Vault of Souls, but the Vault will not open without the masks of the royal line, which were stolen from me ages ago.
If you can locate the Royal Masks and return them to me, I can unlock the Vault of Souls, and reunite the Zeraphi and Ezrohir! Please, my mortal friend... help me end this war.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Trill-Bot 4000. I am the player's robot friend. outside the dungeon is a location. Trill-Bot 4000 is present in outside the dungeon.  is a location. Azimuthoscope is an object. Azimuthoscope is an important component of Trill-Bot 4000. 
I believe you have found one of my missing components! There appears to be a trail of them, leading toward that dungeon.
If you follow the trail of my Parts, it might lead you to my Azimuthoscope: the component I need to direct you to another treasure trove!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Trill-Bot 4000. I am a robot.  is a location. Cognition Linkage is an object. Cognition Linkage is an important component of Trill-Bot 4000. 
It appears you have found my body. Very good. This is where my memories are stored  including the locations of multiple caches of treasure. I could share these with you, if you would help me reacquire the rest of my components.
We should begin with my Cognition Linkage. Without that, I won't be able to do much more than repeat this message. My sensors tell me it is somewhere nearby. Find it and reinstall it, and I will direct you to one of those treasure troves.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Trill. I am a great bard who received a blow to the head in Torchlight. Veras is a location. Veras is a land. Torchlight is a location. Torchlight is a city in Veras that was destroyed. Redhaven is a location. Redhaven is a city in Veras. 
Greetings! I am the great bard Trill. You've heard of me of course, my talent is known throughout all of Veras. From Torchlight to Redhaven they sing of my.. songs.
Torchlight... did something happen there? I feel a bit... Ah, nevermind. I recognize this place!
The spiders called, the Sisters three, the old trunk yawning wide,
Through ancient halls, dark ancestry, they met their fates inside.
An apt verse, you'll agree. I wrote it myself of course.
The rest of the song eludes me... Leniency please! Of course such a lapse is unforgivable in a great bard such as myself, but I feel a bit.. off.
Still, even that bare fragment of verse can lead you to glory. Go forth, brave warrior, and slay the mighty beasts! Whatever they may be...

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Umahd. I am a disembodied male Zeraphi warrior. 
I am no ghost, only disembodied spirit: a Zeraphi warrior, torn from his wrappings, but unable to tear himself away from this world. Umahd is my name. I was defeated in battle, and my physical form taken from me, and made to serve the Ezrohir. But the Ezrohir Marauder who wears my wrappings has returned, no doubt thinking me long gone.
Find that Ezrohir Marauder! Restore my physical form, and I shall reward you!

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Officer. I am a military officer working for the Professor. Scrapworks is a location. Scrapworks is a junkyard. Abandoned Sawmill is a location. Abandoned Sawmill is a dysfunct sawmill. 
So, the Professor sent you after the Power Source? We were on the same mission, but the only way to the Scrapworks is through that pile of rock.
I know the Abandoned Sawmill used to have plenty of explosives from when the place was still in operation - a little bit of dynamite would probably get the job done here.
I sent my troop after it, but haven't heard a thing. If you can head up there and get that dynamite, we could all pass through and get the Professor what he needs.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 Temple Steppes is a location. Temple Steppes is a region. 
If you're going out to the Temple Steppes, I could use your help. The Sturmbeorn have set up a makeshift smithy there, and they have two blacksmiths making suits of armor for wild Warbeasts they've captured.
Those Sturmbeorn seem to be working from schematics, but they keep them under lock and key. Do you think you might be able to get in there and grab the armor schematics?

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 I am Widget. I am a friendly man. Sundered Battlefield is a location. Sundered Battlefield is an ancient battlefield in the north. Cacklespit's realm is a location. Cacklespit is present in Cacklespit's realm. Cacklespit is a female witch who has been harassing the player. Fade is present in Sundered Battlefield. Fade is a male spirit, who may want something for his help. 
Since you helped us in our time of need, we have been searching for a way to return the favor.
It seems you've met with some unexpected trouble from Cacklespit the witch. I've done a little research, and if you'd like to find her, I think I can help!
From the lore I've been able to piece together, there is a secret way to her hidden realm. The spirit, Fade, can open the way - but he may ask for something in return. You'll have to journey to the Sundered Battlefield in the north. Search for the shrines that mark Fade's resting place. I hope this helps you on your way! I'll keep researching in hopes of finding more information to help you.

This is a quest from Torchlight II
 Zeryphesh is a location. Zeryphesh is a city-state. Undercurrents is a location. Undercurrents is the sewer in Zeryphesh. 
The Ezrohir have installed some infernal devices in the Undercurrents, defiling the supply of water entering Zeryphesh. You must destroy those machines, or Zeryphesh cannot stand against the Ezrohir!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Rinnie. I am a bard and balladeer. 
"Sweet waters of the forest
flow through each den and glade
nourishing the unicorns
who lie graceful in the shade..."

I'm Rinnie, a bard and balladeer.
I have been working on a ballad about the Unicorn Run in the High Forest. I'd like to use a more reliable source than simply hearsay and folklore, though. If you ever find an authoritative history of the run in your travels, I'd love to get my hands on it.
A friend of mine gave me this Scroll of Protection From Poison and I have yet to make use of it, so you could have it as a reward.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Firebead Elvenhair. I am an elderly mage who loves books.  is a location. "The History of the Fateful Coin" is an object. "The History of the Fateful Coin" is a book. 
Hello, I am Firebead Elvenhair: an elderly mage and a bookworm.
Oh, the world of books... I have heard that a new copy of that wondrous tome, "The History of the Fateful Coin," can be had for a pretty penny in one of the stores around here. If you would be so kind as to buy it for an old man like myself, I'd gladly reimburse you.
I'd even give you a little bonus to help in your travels, a book called "History of the Dead Three".

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ardrouine. I am a distressed mother.  is a location. 
Please help me, I am just poor Ardrouine!
I don't know where else to turn. My little boy was playing in that abandoned lighthouse to the northwest when a pack of worgs surrounded it. Please just turn them back, and I can coax him down. There's not much time!
I can pay you 60 coins: this money is all my husband brought back from market this past week. My son's life is worth this and so much more.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Areana. I am a mysterious noblewoman. Elfsong Tavern is a location. Elfsong Tavern is a rough tavern. Cyrdemac is present in Elfsong Tavern. Cyrdemac is a man who blackmails Areana. 
Perhaps... perhaps you are the type of people who can help me. I am in need of someone to... perform a service for me. I need someone... removed. This scoundrel is no innocent! He threatens to ruin my life with... with the spreading of... accusations. He threatens to ruin my reputation and standing unless I pay him an exorbitant sum almost weekly! I beg of thee... you must help me. His name is Cyrdemac and he frequents the Elfsong Tavern. I have not been there myself, but I hear it is quite a rough place. You could do the deed in the main bar itself and likely none would call the guards. I know not if he will have friends with him though. Thank you for this.
Upon your return I shall pay you 2,000 gold. A small price to have this embarrassment removed.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Albert. I am a young boy. 
Hi! I'm Albert.
'Scuse me. I ever so sowwy to bother, but could you help me? I've lost my little dog Rufie and I can't find him. He's probably ever so scared wight now. Poor Rufie isn't used to strange places an' people. You're sure to know him when you see him, 'cuz he's just the cutest little thing. Here, take this as well. His favorite chew toy, it is. He'll know you're a friend if you have it in your hands.
I have a small reward for you: it's another of his chew things, but we can get more where we're going.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Arkion. I am a necromancer. sewers is a location. sewers is . 
The name's Arkion.
I've got a dirty deed fer ya. How 'bout you go down into the sewers and bring me up a body. Now, I don't ask questions 'bout how you come 'bout them and I don't want any questions 'bout what I use 'em fer. Bring 'em to me when ya find 'em.
There'll be 250 gold pieces to relieve the stink of it all.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Alatos Thuibuld. I am the leader of the Thieves' Guild. Baldur's Gate is a location. Alatos Thuibuld is present in Baldur's Gate. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a city-state. Oberan's Estate is a location. Oberan's Estate is a house inhabited by Shandalar's daughters. Shandalar is present in Baldur's Gate. Shandalar is a local male wizard. Grand Duchess Liia Jannath is present in Baldur's Gate. Grand Duchess Liia Jannath is a powerful female noble. spellbook, statuette, and artifact fragment is an object. 
I am Alatos Thuibuld, though I thank you not to mention that too often.
A local wizard by the name of Shandalar makes his home in a moored Halruaan skyship. It would appear that he has the knowledge to reproduce these flying marvels and is currently organizing the sale of the recipe to Grand Duchess Liia Jannath. He has drawn up a set of rituals and has procured an artifact fragment and an ancient statuette vital to the spell that keeps the ships aloft. These he has divided amongst his daughters until the deal is to proceed. I have been contacted by a representative of the Halruaans, and they have no wish to see scores of flying ships manufactured in every port. You are to infiltrate the place of exchange that is known as Oberan's Estate, steal the ingredients, and return here with them. Simple enough.
You would be well paid. Enough gold to give you a backache and, if I am well pleased, mayhaps a magical weapon or two. Perhaps a little more, perhaps a little less. It entirely depends upon your performance.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Nemphre. I am a flirty woman. Baldur's Gate is a location. Nemphre is present in Baldur's Gate. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a large city. Arkion is present in Baldur's Gate. Arkion is a male necromancer. Arkion's amulet is an object. 
Mmm, be a sweet one. Could you do a favor for Nemphre?
An old lover of mine has followed me here to the city and has been threatening me with some very dark magic. His name is Arkion and, if you could just get a certain amulet of his to me, perhaps there are a few things I could do for you? Such as giving you a Scroll of Vampiric Touch, mmn?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ordulinian. I am a priest. Baldur's Gate is a location. Ordulinian is present in Baldur's Gate. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a large city. Arkion is present in Baldur's Gate. Arkion is a male necromancer. Nemphre is present in Baldur's Gate. Nemphre is a female necromancer. Bloodstone Amulet is an object. Bloodstone Amulet is an amulet. Onyx Ring is an object. Onyx Ring is a ring. 
Ah, fair adventurers, I'm Ordulinian.
The roads of this fair city are lined with fools, are they not? Two of the greatest are Arkion and Nemphre, necromancers grown bitter over lost love. Alas, but they use petty trinkets as their excuse for enmity. Nemphre covets Arkion's Bloodstone Amulet and Arkion dreams of her Onyx Ring. Steal those trinkets and bring them to me and perhaps those two fools can at last find peace.
For your troubles I will give you a Cloak of Non-Detection. It may be of some use to you in the future.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Fergus. I am a happy man who wants to give a gift to his wife. 
I'm Fergus, a very happy man.
I've got to admit, I ain't never been happier. Got a letter from my lady and she's gonna be home reeeal soon... Just gotta find me a pretty little ring for her pretty little finger and all's gonna be just fine, just fine. But my lady, she transcends gold or silver or fancy stones. She'll have nothing less than an angel skin ring from me.
For reward, if you're ever needin' a little work around here, check with Scar, second-in-command of the city guard. You can tell him I recommended you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Unshey. I am a writer. Friendly Arm Inn is a location. Friendly Arm Inn is an inn.  is a location. Girdle of Piercing is an object. Girdle of Piercing is a belt. 
Hey, I'm Unshey, an aspiring writer.
Have you heard? There's a rogue ogre with a belt fetish to the south of the Friendly Arm Inn. I had to bargain my new girdle of piercing for my life out there. Wasn't even interested in an autographed copy of my book. Hey, if you can get that belt back to me, I'd be mighty grateful.
You'll get 95 gold pieces for your trouble, and a new history book I've just completed.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Delsvirftanyon. I am a merchant. Durlag's Tower is a location. Durlag's Tower is a tourist attraction. gold is an object. 
I'm Delsvirftanyon, a merchant by trade.
I sell the small and shinies for the tourists in the Durlag's Tower but there are none now there! Bandits on the roads keep the people off and away so I'm stuck with all this stock I am. Ward tokens I have of all shapes and size. Some I found by elven ruin and some I made myself I made. Maybe some good or maybe all bad but don't they all look pretty? I tell you what I will. I'll sell you everything I have you buy for low low price of 500 gold is all. Then I go home where they appreciate a bauble shine.
Buy or no and walk the walk?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ender Sai. I am a spy. Cloakwood is a location. Cloakwood is a forest. 
This whole thing is dirty to the core, that's what I know! These aren't your ordinary bandits here. Tazok's been making regular visits to the Cloakwood, so that's where I'd start if I were you. There are some documents in that chest that might be worth taking a look at, too.
Now go step on some toes, all right? And you can tell them Ender Sai sent you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Fuller. I am a guard. Candlekeep Inn is a location. Candlekeep Inn is an inn. Winthrop is present in Candlekeep Inn. Winthrop is an innkeeper. 
Hey kid, it's me, Fuller.
I need a quarrel of crossbow bolts. If you could get some off Winthrop at the inn, I'll reimburse you. there'll be a dagger in it for you too. My father killed a hobgoblin with it once, many years ago. Stabbed him right in the back, he did. It ain't no broadsword, but it'll do in a pinch.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Gerde. I am a ranger.  is a location. ankhegs are enemies. 
I'm Gerde, a ranger.
You've come here to fight ankhegs? Well, listen up: it's mating season, so it's primarily females coming up to the surface, looking to put on a little extra weight. They're hungry, they're aggressive, and there are a lot of them. Now, the point of this exercise is not to exterminate them, but to keep their population to a manageable level. Remember, they aerate the soil and thereby improve crop yields by as much as 15%. Food is going to be scarce enough in the next few years, so keep that in mind when you're out there. No more than four ankhegs per party. After that it's catch and release, all right? Most of the activity starts about fifty yards to the east.
Now move out, everyone. You'll get 75 gold pieces, if you stick to the quota.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Mad Arcand the Stinking. I am a happy and insane wizard.  is a location. 
I like you, yes I do (wertle, wertle, wertle, wooo...) and I know of a way to make you like me too (wertle, wertle, wertle-wooooo...).
Down by the ocean, down by the sea, there's a pirate ship waiting for you and for me. Bring me what's in it, but don't ever wear it, or sure enough, soon enough, you'll wertle too... A beautiful ring! Where to get it? (Most likely quite near where exactly I put it...) Wertle, oh wertle, oh dear wertle-wooo... wertle, oh wertle, oh woo...
Oh, I know what you're thinking of Mad Arcand the Stinking who takes what you give him and gives not in return. So there is this bottle, but please don't topple or (wertle, poor wertle), you'll surely get burned.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Nadarin. I am an annoyed warehouse overseer.  is a location. 
Hey, you! Are you either bored or foolish? Either way, I, Nadarin, could use your services.
Some wiseacre tried to send a basilisk by freight and now it's broken free and is making a mess of one of the warehouses at the harbor.
There'll be 500 gold pieces for taking care of that on such short notice. Also, you might want these. They're an item I obtained from a fence I know in a far-away city. You never know, they might fit you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Kelddath Ormlyr. I am a man of justice. Red Canyons is a location. Red Canyons is . Bassilus is present in Red Canyons. Bassilus is a mad male murderer. 
A warning from Kelddath Ormlyr:
know that there is a madman by the name of Bassilus who roams the wilderness killing any innocents that happen along his path. He's been last sighted in Red Canyons.
If you were to dispose of him and bring back his holy symbol, there is a large reward offered. It is a grisly task, but sometimes there is little choice.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Zeke. I am a charlatan. Nashkel Carnival is a location. Zeke is present in Nashkel Carnival. Nashkel Carnival is a location. Nashkel Carnival is a carnival. Branwen is present in Nashkel Carnival. Branwen is a warrior woman turned into stone. 
Come one, come all! Zeke's got something to show you!
Take a look at the stone warrior maiden. How long has she been trapped in this petrified form, no one knows! Be the first to learn, for the mere price of 500 gold. For that small amount of money, I shall give you a magic scroll, and with this scroll you can release the maiden from her stone prison. Think of the gratitude she would feel to her saviors. Perhaps she's a princess from some far-off land, or maybe a powerful sorceress in search of a concubine. You can't afford not to know!
Buy the scroll!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Brielbara. I am a female mage of minor power. Low Lantern is a location. Low Lantern is a ship filled with prostitutes. Yago is present in Low Lantern. Yago is an evil male mage. 
Travelers! I am Brielbara, a mage of minor power.
I'll pay you 200 gold, not much for heroic adventurers, but all that I have.
An evil mage has laid a curse upon my only child, Namara. She is slowly wasting away and, without help, she'll die. The mage who did this is named Yago, and I'm sure that he possesses the remedy to the curse. Would you track him down for me, please? He's been staying at a place called the Low Lantern. It's the playground for the wicked and depraved, a ship where prostitutes ply their trade. All I want you to do is find him and take his spellbook. I have enough magical skill to reverse the curse if I had the formula for his spell.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Mr. Colquetle. I am a depressed man. 
What cruel whim of the fates controls this torment of me?!
I, Mr. Colquetle, have heard nothing from my son and his wife for nigh unto a week now, and all else pales in importance until I do. I should have known better than to allow his travel in these dangerous times.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Cordyr. I am a fisherman from down south, where the Cloud Peaks tumble into the sea.  is a location. 
Pleasure to meet you. The name's Cordyr.
I'm from down south, where the Cloud Peaks tumble into the sea. A pair of sirines has been trying to move into the area. They sank my fishing boat and put me right out of work. *sigh* If they weren't so dang beautiful, it would be a lot easier to convince people of how much of a nuisance they can be. Can you kill them for me? It's a dirty deed but it's the cost of civilization, isn't it?
You can have a haste scroll as payment.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Dreppin. I am a farmer. next to Dreppin is a location. Nessa is present in next to Dreppin. Nessa is Dreppin's cow. 
Hi. I'm Dreppin. Nice day, ain't it? Too bad Nessa the cow here ain't enjoyin' it though, her bein' sick 'n all.
I need to get her one of them potions of antidote off Hull. He stayed up drinkin' last night and got hauled outta bed to man the gates early this morning, so I bet he's got a few of them lyin' around somewheres.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Drienne. I am a young girl.  is a location. 
I'm just a little girl Drienne.
Mommy says if you ever need to know something important, you should ask an adult. Pixie, my cat, she was playing close to the waterfall and slipped... I hope she's all right.
You can have this scroll Daddy gave me, if you find Pixie. I can't read the words yet anyways.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Dryad of the Cloud Peaks. I am a distressed dryad. 
Please, kind spirits, a wondrous ancient oak is in peril. It is the tree to which I am bonded! If it dies, I, Dryad of the Cloud Peaks, die.
It is about to be attacked by two who would defile the majesty of nature. They have avoided my charms and must be stopped before irreparable harm is done. Would you heed my plea?
There is a potion that might help you on your journeys.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Edwin. I am a pompous wizard. Nashkel is a location. Nashkel is a town.  is a location. 
I am Edwin, a wizard, and I require you! (Yes, they will do nicely.)
I would have you kill a witch, the witch Dynaheir. She is treacherous, but with your participation I foresee no difficulty. Last I heard of her, she was traveling to the west of Nashkel, close to the gnoll stronghold located there. Will you assist?
The prize I offer would surely be beyond measure in your meager understanding. Your payment shall be one year of my services as a wizard. I am sure you agree that my guidance will be far more valuable than any monetary sum.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Kagain. I am an owner of a caravan escort service. Amn is a location. Amn is a country. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a major city.  is a location. 
Greetings, I'm Kagain.
I hire mercenaries to escort caravans on route from Amn to Baldur's Gate. Right now I'm lookin' for some strong sword arms, and I'm willing to pay high. It seems that one of the caravans under my protection never arrived at Baldur's Gate, and I need to know what happened. I've been having a lot of problems with bandit activity lately, but they've always only taken the cargo and let the caravan go afterward.
I'll pay each of you 30 gold per dead bandit, plus a share of any booty, if there's no one left alive to claim it.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Fahrington. I am a monk.  is a location. Fahrington's scroll of wisdom is an object. Fahrington's scroll of wisdom is scroll. 
I am Fahrington.
A tasloi has stolen my scroll of wisdom, wanderer, and fled eastward towards the ettercap's lair. The poor tasloi is probably quite dead by now but the ettercaps, of course, will not recognize the scroll's value.
If you could retrieve it for me, I promise to brighten your karma.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Brun. I am an old farmer. Brun's farm is a location. Brun is present in Brun's farm.  is a location. 
I beseech thee, kind soul, please help.
I'm farmer Brun. It's strange happenings at my farm, and I've not the strength I once had. I've nothing to offer, and even if I did I doubt such as you would have need of it. My son Nathan and his friends went looking for our missing cattle, then they just up and disappeared! Been gone for days now and, with all the bandits around, who knows what's happened. I don't know where they were heading, but I saw some sort o' tracks to the west.
Please find Nathan. I can't afford to keep the farm without my son.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Firebead Elvenhair. I am a mage.  is a location. identify scroll is an object. identify scroll is a special scroll. 
I, Firebead Elvenhair, have a small errand for you.
I left an identify scroll with Tethtoril, in the inner grounds. He should be done examining it by now, so if you could fetch it for me, I'd be grateful. I have a great use for those types of scrolls.
Allow me to cast a little spell on you as a reward. It will protect you from any evil you might meet tonight.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am G'axir the Seer. I am a seer.  is a location. 
Your future... is hemmed in darkness.
Your lives... are in the balance.
Act wisely, act judiciously... and bring me the sphene gem, should you find it...
You... are a light entering darkness.
You... are a seeker of truths.
You... are more than you realize.
The Seer has spoken it because the Seer knows the fear you harbor, the fear you shall yet become.
In the lair of the basilisk, you will find a sphene gem... You would do well to bring it to the Seer.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ghorak. I am a diseased man. Three Old Kegs is a location. Three Old Kegs is a tavern. The Lady's Hall is a location. The Lady's Hall is a temple.  is a location. Agnasia is present in The Lady's Hall. Agnasia is a female priestess. 
For your own health and that of your children, come no closer.
I, Ghorak, was cursed with this fell disease as punishment for my wickedness... No, your potions and magics are of little use. The only way to cure this sickness is to right the wrongs of the past. Behind a painting at the Three Old Kegs, you will find the skull of my brother, Kereph. Take it to Agnasia in The Lady's Hall. She will know what to do with it.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Gurke. I am an old man who is tired of hearing jokes about losing his cloak in Cloakwood. Cloakwood is a location. Cloakwood is a forest. 
Old Gurke had his famous cloak stolen right off his back by a batch of paltry tasloi.
Yeah, yeah, it's old news and if you make one crack about the Cloakwood being an appropriate place to lose it, at least, I'll put your liver on the menu. Now move on and let the next people in line have their laugh.
However, if you happen to find my cloak, I'll give you 280 gold pieces for returning it.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Bjornin. I am a paladin. Beregost is a location. Bjornin is present in Beregost. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a town.  is a location. 
I'm still healing from my latest encounters. They did quite a number on me, those half-ogres. There's a band of them fortifying themselves in the mountains south-southwest of here...
If you could give them a taste of justice by testing your steel against them, that would do me, Bjornin, proud.
In an effort to encourage such deeds of righteousness, allow me to present to you this shield as a reward upon your return...

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Hull. I am a guardsman manning the gates.  is a location. 
Hey, kid, it's me, Hull.
I woke late this morning and left my sword in the barracks before going on duty. If you want to get it for me, it's in the chest at the foot of my bed on the right side of the barracks. Quick now, before the Gatewarden catches me without it.
You'll also find an antidote there. I think Dreppin needs one for old Nessa.
You'll get 20 gold pieces for saving my skin from the Chief.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Jared. I am a man running away from a bear.  is a location. 
Oh, thank goodness someone came by.
I'm Jared. There's a bear on the other side of that bridge, and it's coming this way! I can't run anymore!
Please hold it off  I'll give you anything!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Joia. I am a woman who lost a precious item. Friendly Arms Inn is a location. Joia is present in Friendly Arms Inn. Friendly Arms Inn is a location. Friendly Arms Inn is an inn.  is a location. Flamedance Ring is an object. Flamedance Ring is a striking ring. 
Hey there, you're new here, aren't you? Could I, Joia, trouble you a moment?
I need someone to go club some heads for me. I was ambushed by a band o' hobgoblins within sight of this inn's walls. Robbed me blind, they did, and I want to return the favor.
I don't care about most of my things, but I want to get my ring back. My father gave it to me, you understand? The creatures were just north of the inn. Bring my ring back here when you get it. You'll know it when you see it. It's a Flamedance Ring, and very striking.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
  is a location. Joseph is present in the mines. Joseph is a male miner. 
My husband is missing in the mines. All I know about the mines are that men keep on disappearing in their hellish depths.
My husband is one of the miners, but he hasn't been home for weeks. His name is Joseph, and he wears his wedding ring on his left hand. It's a greenstone ring.
Please, find him and tell me how he is doing!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
  is a location. Kylee is present in the mines. Kylee is a male miner. Kylee's dagger is an object. Kylee's dagger is a dagger. 
Are you going to be going down into the mines? If so, could you return this dagger to Kylee?
He dropped it when he went into the mine the other day and I haven't seen him since.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Laerta. I am a young girl.  is a location. next to Laerta is a location. Louise is present in next to Laerta. Louise is a young girl. 
Hi! I'm Laerta. That's my twin sister, Louise.
Mom and Dad don't believe us, but there's a bogeyman that comes and looks in our window every night. We're real glad we're twins because, if there were only one of us, then there'd be no one to hold on to when we get scared. Scare away the bogeyman, would you?
Mom says to give this scroll as a reward. I think it's supposed to protect you from any other bogeypeople you find.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Landrin. I am a woman. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a town. Jovial Juggler Inn is a location. Jovial Juggler Inn is an inn in Beregost.  is a location. Landrin's husband's boots is an object. Landrin's bottle of wine is an object. 
Hey, I'm Landrin.
I've got an infestation of poisonous spiders in my cellar in Beregost. You'll know the house when you see it: just to the west of the Jovial Juggler Inn.
Here, take these potions with you. They're antidotes against the poison.
Keep whatever you don't use and I'll give you an extra 120 gold pieces if you bring back my husband's old boots that he keeps down there. If you bring back one of their bodies and my ol' bottle of wine as well, I might toss in a little something extra too.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Brevlik. I am a discreet man. Hall of Wonders is a location. Hall of Wonders is a museum. 
HELLO! SHHH! Shh... ah... um... I mean, hello.
Might I have but a moment of your, ah, time? I should like to procure your talents for a, ah, unique service, though it's not like you would have to do anything socially untoward. Okay, it's stealing, but it's only the one item: A wondrously curious little toy from distant land. What did they call it? Oh, yes, a "telescope," of all things. It's a misleading name for such an interestingly crafted artifact. "Golden Extra-Farseer" would have suited its craftsmanship so much better. The tele-thingy is on display at the Hall of Wonders, and were it in the possession of anyone else it might be purchasable. It's roguery on par with Danilo Thann of Waterdeep, and I don't want anybody hurt.
I'll pay you well: 500 gold for one night's work. It's better than you could hope for in a year on the docks!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Lothander. I am Marek's partner in crime.  is a location. the marker square is a location. Haspur is present in the marker square. Haspur is a male divider. 
I am Lothander.
I do not wish you harm. My partner, Marek, has poisoned you. While you slept, he slipped a slow-acting magical poison into your food. You have about ten days to live. Common priest spells won't help you. Only one thing can, and that's the antidote. I can help you find it, if you help me first.
My problem is this: I don't work for the Iron Throne because I wish to but rather because I have been forced. I have been enspelled with a geas. If I do not obey everything that Marek orders of me the spell will take effect and I shall waste away. I need a way to rid myself of the spell. I know of a diviner at the market square who may have the answers I seek, but I don't have the money to pay him. Will you help me?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Melicamp of Beregost. I am a mage adept in the mystical arts. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a town. High Hedge is a location. High Hedge is a tower directly to the west of Beregost. Thalantyr is present in High Hedge. Thalantyr is a powerful mage, and Melicamp of Beregost's master. 
Buc-becaw! HELLLLP-becaw! I am "no ordinary talking chicken," and I am in need of your *cluck* help. I am Melicamp of Beregost, a *cluck* mage adept in the mystical arts.
A... misread... incantation seems to be *cluck* the source of my troubling form. 'Tis been over a month since I *cluck* uttered a polymorph spell, and I simply cannot return to my normal *cluck* form!
There is a tower directly to the west of *cluck* Beregost, about which can be found the mage Thalantyr. I am his apprentice, and I am certain he will *cluck* aid me. I'll just nestle in your pack until we get there.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Mirianne. I am a concerned wife. Amn is a location. Amn is a country.  is a location. 
My husband had to make a sudden business trip to Amn and I'm so worried for him.
"Mirianne," he always said, "Mirianne, who knows the road better than old Roe?" But the highways just aren't as safe as they once were and there hasn't been a messenger from Amn here in months.
Could you keep your eyes open along the southern roads and let me know if you find anything?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Noralee. I am a female warrior.  is a location. 
I'm Noralee.
I just had some new armor shipped in from a far-away city and I'm afraid I must have dropped the gauntlets into one of the shipping crates somewhere between here and the harbor.
Please, if you can find them before somebody else picks them up, I would be most grateful.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Nadine. I am a worried mother. Baldur's Gate is a location. Nadine is present in Baldur's Gate. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a city. Euric is present in Baldur's Gate. Euric is Nadine's youngest son, who knows how to take care of himself. a good luck talisman is an object. a good luck talisman is a talisman. 
I, Nadine, desperately need someone's help.
Euric, my youngest son, has run away again... He's always had a touch of the wanderer in him and he knows how to take care of himself, but... Oh, I'm just worried sick. This city gets more dangerous every day... If you find him, could you give him this good luck talisman? I'm sure we'd all sleep a little better.
Let me give you this necklace as a token of my thanks upon your return. I don't know if it's worth anything but it has been in the family for years.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Sarhedra. I am a woman who does not like the player.  is a location. 
Hmph. I am Sarhedra and I don't like you.
I bet you're another one of those adventurers wantin' to change the world or somethin'. Well, go pick on the ogres to the south if it will make you feel better.
Go find someone else to talk to, I'm no good at this quest stuff. I have... ummm... people to see and places to be.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Perdue. I am a man who doesn't like gnolls. Beregost is a location. Perdue is present in Beregost. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a town. High Hedge is a location. High Hedge is a landmark.  is a location. 
Hullo. The name's Perdue.
There's a gnoll 'oled up in the hills due west of 'ere, close to the High Hedge. Damn thievin' ball-o-fur stole my short sword two days back. The sword ain't worth the tin she's made from.
I'll give ya 75 gold pieces just to seal that yappin' mouth of 'is for good.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Petrine. I am a young orphan girl.  is a location. Angel is present in Bheren's house. Angel is Petrine's cat. Bheren is present in Bheren's house. Bheren is Petrine's nasty uncle. 
Hi, I'm Petrine and my folks aren't around no more and I ran away from my Uncle Bheren 'cause he's real mean.
My cat's really an angel, though, and she protects me when bad things happen. Or at least she did. I can't find her now, though. I think she went back to my uncle's to get her ring. There's this ring that she loves to play with, but when I ran away I had to leave it at my nasty uncle's. If you could just get me the ring, I'm sure Angel would come back.
Could you do it, oh please?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Phlydia. I am an absent-minded woman. outside Candlekeep Inn is a location. Phlydia is present in outside Candlekeep Inn. Candlekeep Inn is a location. Candlekeep Inn is an inn.  is a location. "The History of Halruaa" is an object. "The History of Halruaa" is a book. 
Oh, hello! It's me, Phlydia!
Have you seen my copy of "The History of Halruaa" anywhere? You know how I can't stand the constant shuffling of arthritic feet up in the library... So I thought I'd get a bit of fresh air just east of here and... Oh, I hate being so absent-minded! Please, if you find it, I really do need it back.
If you do, you can take this little gem of mine. Maybe a merchant will give you a little something for it.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Oublek. I am a man who hands out bounties on criminals. emeralds is an object. 
It's me, Oublek.
A bit of nonsense from a local artist named Prism. Made off with a couple of emeralds, he did.
There is a reward for the return of the gems: a 300 gold bounty.
Prism's fate is of less importance.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Quinn. I am a man scared of ankhegs.  is a location. 
I'm Quinn. There's some ankhegs causin' chaos upriver, alon' the east bank, just north o' that bitch priestess.
They took down my pal, Nester, and dang near hauled me under too. 'At's why I'm so glum now. Nester's mama's gonna want somepin' of 'is to bury, but I'm still gettin' too many nightmares and all to go back there.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Reevor. I am the player's drill instructor. outside Reevor's storehouse is a location. Reevor is present in outside Reevor's storehouse.  is a location. 
I thought I asked you to clean the rats out of this building yesterday, already. Hop to it! Get in there!
Ah yes, kill them like the rats that they are! A glorious battle unlike any this world has ever seen...
I'll give you 5 gp, don't spend it all in one place.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Minsc. I am a noble warrior and Dynaheir's protector.  is a location. the gnoll stronghold is a location. Dynaheir is present in the gnoll stronghold. Dynaheir is a woman. with Minsc is a location. Boo is present in with Minsc. Boo is Minsc's pet hamster. 
Greetings, we are Minsc and Boo. Boo is my faithful hamster companion, and more than he seems.
We have traveled far to explore this land, but now my charge Dynaheir has been taken from us. 'Twas gnolls, and once we have tracked them I will beat sense into their heads until they release her.
Accompany us, and bards will sing the deeds of Minsc and Boo... and friends.
Onward to the gnoll stronghold in the west!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Dradeel. I am an elven mage who was a guide to Balduran.  is a location. 
I am Dradeel, mage and recent convert to the Church of Selne.
I was the guide for Balduran's brave adventures to the ends of the world and beyond. The wolf-men are everywhere. The lycanthropes' lair is in Balduran's ship. My spellbook lies within. With it, I am a powerful mage. Without it, I am the pauper that stands before you. With my spellbook retrieved, I may be able to discover a way off of the island.
If you go to destroy the lycanthropes' lair, I would ask that you find my book.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Safana. I am a persuasive female adventurer. Candlekeep is a location. Candlekeep is a fortress.  is a location. 
My name is Safana and I can make you richer than you could imagine.
I know where the pirate Black Alaric dumped his greatest trove of treasure. Knowing that you are a dynamic and intelligent person, I know you'd want to join me in a venture to get this treasure.
Well, we should be off then. From what my map showed, the pirate cove is located somewhere along the coast, just south of Candlekeep.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Lena. I am Sam's unkempt female friend. Temple of Wisdom is a location. Temple of Wisdom is a temple. with Lena is a location. Sam is present in with Lena. Sam is a badly injured man. the Temple of Wisdom is a location. Gellana Mirrorshade is present in the Temple of Wisdom. Gellana Mirrorshade is a priestess who can help Sam. 
Please wait a moment, kind traveler! You've got to help me!
My name is Lena. You must forgive me for my appearance, but I've been wandering the wilderness for more than a week now.
My friend is badly hurt, and he might die if he doesn't get assistance soon. His name is Sam. If you were to take him to Gellana Mirrorshade at the Temple of Wisdom, she'd help him.
Please, can you do this?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 
I am a proud member of the Flaming Fist. I've been searching for a deserter. His name is Samuel, and he should be traveling with a woman.
There is a bounty of 50 gold for his capture.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Degrodel. I am a pompous wizard. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a major city.  is a location. Helm of Balduran is an object. Helm of Balduran is the helmet of a legendary hero. 
First of all, my name is Degrodel. I have been on the lookout for skilled adventurers. My task is very simple.
Some years ago, an evil band of mercenaries were all petrified while trying to break into the home of Ramazith. For those of you with a limited vocabulary, petrified means "turned to stone." Anyhow, one of those adventurers had in his possession an item of power: the Helm of Balduran. Ramazith didn't know this at the time and so, after turning them all to stone, he simply sold their bodies to an art collector living in the heart of Baldur's Gate.
What I would like you to do is find these statues, turn them back to flesh, and take the item. I will give you these six scrolls of stone to flesh. Use them on the statues when you find them.
The estate can be found just west of the fairgrounds in the center of town. Good luck, and don't entertain any thoughts about betraying me. It could be very hazardous to your health.
You will be paid 5,000 gold for this service. This is a kingly sum, so I won't barter with you about the amount.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Tiber. I am a young, scared man. Cloakwood is a location. Cloakwood is a forest.  is a location. Chelak is present in Cloakwood. Chelak is Tiber's brother. "Spider's Bane" is an object. "Spider's Bane" is a sword that was created to kill spiders. 
He-hello, travelers. I'm Tiber. Could... could I take up some of your time? I would be very grateful if you would just listen to... if you would just help me!
It's my brother, you see. He and I went into the Cloakwood to clear the woods of the spider colony that infests it. I know it sounds foolish... but my brother had found the sword "Spider's Bane"! The sword was created to kill spiders... and we thought we could become famous... the heroes of Cloakwood, and all that. But my brother hasn't returned yet... and it's been more than a week.
Please, could you go into the woods and find him for me? His name's Chelak. My mother would be so shattered if Chelak were to be dead.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Pheirkas. I am a professional thief. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a city. Feldepost's Inn is a location. Feldepost's Inn is an inn in Beregost. in his room in Feldepost's Inn is a location. Algernon is present in in his room in Feldepost's Inn. Algernon is a fat man. 
Hmm, I am Pheirkas and I prefer not to work with amateurs.
There's a fat man by the name of Algernon staying at Feldepost's Inn in Beregost. He keeps a cloak with him in his room and I need you to get your larcenous hands on it and bring it back to me.
I assure you that your reward will be handsome.
Try not to kill him, just filch it off his person.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Lady Hannah. I am a noblewoman who is seething because of Ragefast. the town is a location. Lady Hannah is present in the town.  is a location. Ragefast's house is a location. Ragefast is present in Ragefast's house. Ragefast is a powerful mage. 
You may call me Lady Hannah. Ragefast! Oh, he makes me seethe! He's a mage on a power trip and what does he do?
He acquires his own personal nymph and enslaves her in his quarters! Seek him out and look into this matter immediately! His house is in the northwest part of town.
I wish you luck and all the passion of my fury in your task.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ramazith. I am a friendly wizard. Faern is a location. Faern is a continent.  is a location. Ragefast is present in Ragefast's house. Ragefast is a male wizard. 
Greetings to you and yours, my friend. I'm Ramazith.
Might I have your ear a moment? My proposition is thus: I would have you enter into the home of a colleague of mine and effect the release of a creature he has imprisoned there. Ragefast be his name, and he has in his possession one of the most beautiful and useful creatures in all of Faern. It's a nymph he captured some time ago, and I know not what laughable plans he has for her, but I am sure she be more... productive in my care.
I not so rich as to be able to offer huge gold, but as competent wizard I do have the odd magical item of worth. Perhaps an enchanted item will serve your needs, no?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Gandolar Luckyfoot. I am the jolly mayor of Gullykin. Gullykin is a location. Gandolar Luckyfoot is present in Gullykin. Gullykin is a location. Gullykin is a halfling village near the Firewine ruins. Firewine ruins is a location. Firewine ruins is a place where many have died in the past. 
Well met, traveler. Gandolar Luckyfoot, at your disposal.
If I might pull on your coattail a moment more, I have a proposition for you. It's usually nature-quiet by the Firewine ruins, even with its violent bygone. Those who died and did not sleep have mostly found their rest over time. It's a live threat that comes now, with a band of kobolds that moved in.
Perhaps we could prevail upon you to rid us of this menace, and in return, a gift from us you shall receive. Keep whatever you find as well.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
  is a location. Priestess of the Bitch Queen Umberlee is present in near a small shack to the north. Priestess of the Bitch Queen Umberlee is a female priestess of the evil goddess of the sea. 
We're being harassed by a Priestess of the Bitch Queen Umberlee. We don't even know why, but whenever we attempt to fish she turns the weather sour. Two of us were washed away just walking to the docks, but we cannot prove to the guard it was her. We be needin' someone to strong-arm her into leaving us alone.
We've not much money, but I'll gladly give you a... magical weapon from my grandfather's adventuring days. It's a meager amount for your trouble, but it would be a great service to us.
Will you help a group of poor fishermen? She hides out near a small shack to the north. Watch yer back and act quickly; she's tricky.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Laurel. I am a traveling paladin. a spot in the wilderness is a location. Laurel is present in a spot in the wilderness.  is a location. gibberlings are small monsters. gibberlings are enemies. 
I am called Laurel. I am a traveling paladin.
Ah, travelers, this wilderness is too expansive to keep clear of monsters all on my own. Many gibberlings pass through this very spot day and night. Will you stay here and help fend them off?
Fire magics work well against the gibberlings, so if you have such spells, use them.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Scar. I am second-in-command of the Flaming Fist. the Flaming Fist compound is a location. Scar is present in the Flaming Fist compound. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a city.  is a location. Jhasso is present in the Seven Suns compound. Jhasso is the head of the Seven Suns, and an old friend of Scar. 
First off, let me introduce myself. I'm Scar, second-in-command of the Flaming Fist.
I need you to begin an investigation of the Seven Suns trading coster. The Seven Suns leadership has been acting strangely of late. They've been selling off valuable assets and neglecting many of their more profitable trading ventures. Considering the importance that the trading coster holds over the economy of the city, the Grand Dukes are noticeably upset. I've gone to talk to the coster's head, Jhasso. He rudely rebuffed me, telling me to mind my own business. I've known Jhasso for many years, and this isn't his usual behavior. I can't start up an official investigation, as there is no real reason for doing so. That's why I need you.
I want you to break into the Seven Suns compound and find out what's wrong. Use stealth in your investigations; I don't want this operation to cause too much fuss. The most important person to watch for is Jhasso.
Once you've found out as much as possible, report back to me at the Flaming Fist compound.
I'll pay you 2,000 gold for this favor.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Garrick. I am a man who works for Silke Rosena. Sword Coast is a location. Sword Coast is a region. Red Sheaf Inn is a location. Red Sheaf Inn is an inn.  is a location. Silke Rosena is present in outside the Red Sheaf Inn. Silke Rosena is the most skilled musician and actor along the Sword Coast, a woman. 
Hail, adventurers. I'm Garrick, and I work for Silke Rosena. She's the most skilled musician and actor along the Sword Coast. 
I have a proposal for you. How would you like a well-paying job as a bodyguard for my mistress? She's been having some problems of late. Some thugs have been hired by Feldepost to hurt her bad because she didn't perform at his inn when she was supposed to. You can't blame her for not showing up, what with a villain like Feldepost running the place.
Just meet me outside of the Red Sheaf Inn, if you are interested in the job.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Berrun Ghastkill. I am mayor of Nashkel. Nashkel is a location. Berrun Ghastkill is present in Nashkel. Nashkel is a location. Nashkel is a small town.  is a location. 
I am Berrun Ghastkill, mayor of Nashkel.
I need someone to descend into the mines southeast of town and find what has caused our miners to go missing and our ore to become tainted. It won't solve everything, but it's the first step to easing the effects of the iron shortage.
The town can give you a reward of 900 gold pieces. We are a small community and that is all we can afford.
Please, go now and do what you can.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Tremain Belde'ar. I am Lord Priest of Tymora. Water Queen's House is a location. Water Queen's House is a temple. Casson is present in Water Queen's House. Casson is the dead son of Tremain Belde'ar. 
Greetings to you. I am Lord Priest Tremain Belde'ar, a humble servant of Our Smiling Lady Tymora.
My request of you is an odd and very dangerous one. I will not hold you to it if you deem it too extreme. I would have you enter the Water Queen's House and retrieve my son's, Casson's, body. Casson sought to indulge his restless nature by sneaking about the place, and a high price was paid.
You must bring Casson's body to me, that I may restore his life to him.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Officer Vai. I am an officer of the Flaming Fist. Sword Coast is a location. Officer Vai is present in Sword Coast. Sword Coast is a location. Sword Coast is a region. 
I am Officer Vai of the Flaming Fist and, to be honest, I could use your help.
The bandit raids have been getting worse. I used to think that they were just your usual brigands out to make a quick buck in troubled times, but not anymore. They're working for someone... Damn it, this is a fine mess, isn't it?
I'll pay 50 gold pieces for every bandit scalp you can bring me  and spread the news. I want this whole region cleared, and I want to know what in the Nine Hells is going on here.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 Cloudpeak ice fields is a location. Cloudpeak ice fields is a bit to the south from here. 
I am but a humble merchant. Interested in a little business on the side, friend?
I've a man who swears by his grandmother he glimpsed a white wolf up in the Cloudpeak ice fields. It was but a short ways south, and she be easy pickings for a smart sword.
I'd pay you good money for its pelt, so it's a guaranteed sale if you go.
Keep it in mind on your travels.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Hulrik. I am a farmer. Nashkel is a location. Nashkel is a town. 
I'm Hulrik! You have to help me!
Them xvarts are after my cows again! Ever since them xvarts an' their kobold kin swarmed the mines at Nashkel, they've been makin' attacks like that more and more often.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Zhurlong. I am a thief. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a town.  is a location. Boots of Stealth is an object. Boots of Stealth is nice boots. 
Hey, I'm Zhurlong! What is a thief to do, huh? You invest in some Boots of Stealth, you set up shop in the badlands to the south of Beregost and then, WHAM... Along comes a tribe of hobgoblins and they tear the boots from right off your feet!
Damn-blasted hobgoblin bullies... I'll pay you 100 gold pieces to show them who's boss and get those boots back...

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Wenric. I am a farmer.  is a location. zombies are enemies. 
I be Wenric, a farmer by profession.
There's been something killing peoples in and 'round the farms here. Zombies or something. I can understands if you can't stomach the task but, just between you an' me real personal-likes, I don't know who else is gonna do it... All of us haves been goin' for a week now without sleep.
We've counted twenty zombies or so, so keep track as you kill 'em, if that's what you plans on doing.
Once you got 'em all, come back here and I'll gives you the 150 gold pieces that some of us have pooled together.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Zordral. I am a psychotic mage. Bentha's tent is a location. Zordral is present in Bentha's tent. Bentha is present in Bentha's tent. Bentha is a female witch. 
You there, stay back! If any of you come any closer, I'll kill her. I'm serious. Don't make me do it. All I have to do is say the last word of my spell and she'll die.
She's a witch. She'll use her magics to poison the children of this town. She'll butcher the livestock and she'll seduce the young men, make them her puppets. She must be killed!
Are you mocking me?! No one mocks the great Zordral. You will pay for your insolence!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ike Cascadion Vendar. I am a showy adventurer and tour guide. Durlag's Tower is a location. Durlag's Tower is a dangerous tower filled with traps. gold is an object. 
Step right up folks and HEAR the tale of dread placed before thee. Join with me as I, adventurer extraordinaire Ike Cascadion Vendar, lead yet another group of brave souls through the very SEAT of danger in the realms. To Durlag's Tower we shall go, and witness the perils that have taken the lives of hundreds of courageous men and women.
SEE the horror of the treacherous traps! FEEL the presence of the long languishing dead! MARVEL at the wondrous wealth buried below! NOT for the weak of spirit as I will NOT be held accountable for any heart failure during OR after our expedition! Step up, step up! One at a TIME!
A special package deal of 60 gold for you, not that you would need a discount.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Mendas of Waterdeep. I am a strange scholar. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a large city. Elfsong Tavern is a location. Elfsong Tavern is a tavern.  is a location. Balduran's logbook is an object. Balduran's logbook is logbook. sea charts is an object. 
I am Mendas of Waterdeep, quester of small truth in this land. I am in need of favor from you. Can you help a gentle fellow in search for knowledge?
The Merchants' League sailors found Balduran's shipwreck on a small island. I wish to recover the ship's logbook. I will solve mystery of Balduran's final voyage. Merchants' League will destroy my artifacts to get treasure. This must not happen! If you help me, I get things precious to me, you get treasure, merchant men get nothing. You will help, yes?
These men that find island, they keep the sea charts locked up. In Baldur's Gate, there is building in northeast section of city called Merchants' League Counting House. To find it, just go northeast from Elfsong Tavern. The sea charts, they are in there. Most likely, captain of ship will have them. I don't know such things as chart retrieval, but you are hero, and it is no problem for heroes.
There might be small danger, so I give you some gold for the charts.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Delainy. I am a historian. the village is a location. Delainy is present in the village.  is a location. the cloak is an object. 
My name is Delainy, and I am pleasured to meet ye. I seek the return of an item, more an icon.
No doubt you felt the storm that passed just by and by? Village-home did as well, and the cloak that draped the village center was cast to the wind. I think it is beyond the wall, and will not risk the beasts to get it. Will you?
I can offer little besides my gratitude. The cloak is a keepsake, a symbol of old times.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Durlyle. I am a man. the village is a location. Durlyle is present in the village.  is a location. the cloak is an object. 
I am Durlyle, and I am glad to be meeting. I have but a mundane task to ask of you, if you hear me out?
The storm you felt that took your ship? It was fierce here too, and a cloak that draped the village center was cast to the wind. I think it is beyond the wall, and will not risk the beasts to get it. Will you?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Evalt. I am fisherman of the clan. Balduran's Isle is a location. Evalt is present in Balduran's Isle. Balduran's Isle is a location. Balduran's Isle is a small island.  is a location. Blue Lady is present in Balduran's Isle. Blue Lady is a witch. 
I am Evalt, I fish for clan in these savage waters. Listen, outsider, may I ask you for help?
There is a witch on this isle. My brother called her the Blue Lady and those of us who ply these waters have all heard her singing at one time or another. My brother, Evan, heard her more than most. I think that he went to find her. I think that he is under her spell. I must go and find him. This witch might kill him. He is strong but he is under her spell. I fear that she will kill him before he realizes what is happening. Can you find my brother?
I don't know exactly where the Blue Lady is. I have the sense to avoid her, unlike Evan. But I have only heard her singing along the west coast of the island.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Farthing. I am a 5 year old girl. the village is a location. Farthing is present in the village.  is a location. Farthing's doll is an object. 
My name's Farthing. I'm only five. In a few years my papa will let me hunt. Are you allowed to hunt?
I've lost my dolly out in the woods. The gatekeeper won't let me go and get it. Can you get it for me?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Galken. I am a suspicious man. a bar is a location. Galken is present in a bar. Durlag's Tower is a location. Durlag's Tower is a tower atop untouched dungeons filled with riches.  is a location. 
I'm Galken. Hey, how'd you like to be supping on fine venison and tippin' back the good stuff?
I've the key to wealth legendary if you're up for it. No doubt you've heard of the labyrinth at Durlag's Tower, eh? And how she's been pillaged so often that fat nobles go there for picnics? Well, the TOWER has, but BELOW are dungeons untouched! I've a token, a ward token to be sure, that gives entry to them.
'Tis yours if you'll but settle my tab so I can leave this fine place... with all my limbs intact.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Kryla. I am a frightened woman. forest is a location. Kryla is present in forest.  is a location. 
Oh, please help me! I'm Kryla. They kill poor Jondal. The wolf-men.
They attack us as we search for roots in the forest. Please avenge my Jondal. He was so young...
They are this way. Please kill them, I am so frightened.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Maralee. I am a hopeful mother.  is a location. 
Hello, good people. I am Maralee. Two moons ago my husband took my son out hunting with him. They were attacked by those horrible wolf-creatures. They... they killed my husband and took my baby.
Others say that they took the baby away to eat him, but I know he's still alive. He's a beautiful little boy with dark hair like his father. He is three moons old and his name is Peladan.
They took him from my husband northeast of the village, in the woods.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Palin. I am a fighter.  is a location. 
Good day to you, stranger. I'm called Palin. Excuse my, uhm, abruptness but I would ask your assistance.
Just east of this place there are monsters. They are attacking a small group of people. Please, if you have hearts, come and help me fight.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Hurgan Stoneblade. I am a man residing in Citadel Adbar. Citadel Adbar is a location. Citadel Adbar is a fortress.  is a location. "Soultaker" is an object. "Soultaker" is a dagger that belonged to Hurgan Stoneblade's grandpa. 
I am Hurgan Stoneblade, presently residing in Citadel Adbar. Have I got the adventure that'll make ye yearn for glory!
Ye have heard of Durlag's Tower, mayhaps? Me granda' was a good friend of Durlag's. Me granda' was slain by an evil demon but Durlag survived. Durlag kept "Soultaker" that had been me granda's. He was going to send it to me mother, but he was betrayed. A sad tale, that.
After Durlag built the tower his family was replaced by doppelgangers. Durlag killed them all but was driven mad by the act. He entrapped his tower heavily and forgot about me granda's dagger.
If ye be interested, I wish to hire ye to retrieve me granda's dagger, "Soultaker," me birthright.
An enchanted hammer I can offer ye for yer services.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Captain Tollar Kieres. I am a sea captain. Blushing Mermaid is a location. Blushing Mermaid is a tavern. 
Ohoy, I'm Captain Tollar Kieres.
A jug o' this town's hardest liquor would make for a fine departure, if ye'd be so kind.
Old De'Tranion brews a vile swill at'll do the trick. Ye can find the old coot at the Blushing Mermaid.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Therella. I am a worried mother. Durlag's Tower is a location. Durlag's Tower is a dangerous tower owned by Durlag. Dalton is present in Durlag's Tower. Dalton is Therella's son who wants to be a hero. 
Greetings, adventurer. I have, or perhaps I should say had, a son named Dalton. He fell in with a crew of adventurers from Waterdeep. Dalton was always obsessed with the idea of being a hero.
Alas, he has neither the brains nor the ability. Such is a mother's lot in life, however, to watch her children perform acts of idiocy despite her warnings or concerns.
He and his thick-skulled cohorts took it upon themselves to plumb the depths of Durlag's Tower. They bought a ward token from that shyster, Galken, and made ready to leave. Though I begged and cried, Dalton still insisted on going. The band never returned. I fear that they were destroyed by the mad dwarf's machinations. That is the tale, sad but true.
Please find my son if he still lives.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Magreb. I am a man struck with grief.  is a location. 
Goblins! All I know is they killed Rilsa when she tried to talk to them, and I can't face them by myself. At first they appeared around the house of an old mage, but soon they moved into a set of caves to the northeast, taking him with them.
Forgive me. My name is Magreb. Rilsa and I have watched over this area for years, and we never had any trouble with goblins before. Since they killed her, I've been half out of my mind with grief.
Please avenge my Rilsa and give her a proper burial!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Shar-Teel Dosan. I am a man-hating warrior woman. gold is an object. 
Hold, traveler! I, Shar-Teel Dosan, challenge your best warrior to a duel. I don't fight women, so only men should step forward.
I win, and you give me 20 gold. In the unlikely event that one of you bests me, I'll pledge my sword to your cause, however stupid it may be..
Will your champion step forward? I only fight men, so your women will have to be satisfied with just watching. Don't entertain any thoughts about cheating. If any of the rest of you try to interfere in this fight, I'll kill them outright.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Taerom Fuiruim. I am a famous blacksmith. 
Hello there, I'm Taerom Fuiruim, a blacksmith of some renown.
An interesting piece o' material you got there. Ankheg, if I'm not mistaken. Been a while since I seen the like, but if I remember correctly, it makes a fine set of armor. If properly treated it's comparable to full plate with half the weight!
If you're willing to part with your shells I'll give you 500 gold for the lot of them. No more can I offer with business as slow as it is.
Iron shortage hurting us all.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
  is a location. Commander Brage is present in the woods to the west. Commander Brage is the former commander of the guard. 
State your business with the guard and go! Oh, that came out a bit harsher than I meant. I am sorry for my mood. All the guard are still grieving the loss of Commander Brage.
The commander was friend to many before he found a cursed sword. He's not the man he was, by Helm. I'll not believe a man of Brage's rank could kill his own family. 'Twas evil magics of some sort. An entire unit went west after Brage to try to talk some sense to him. It's been a week, and none have returned.
The reward for the commander's head is a king's ransom, but I'll not be lifting MY sword against a brother soldier.
Travel lightly, wanderer. The woods harbor strange things.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Coran. I am a suave thief and archer. Beregost is a location. Beregost is a city. wyvern are a dragon-like creature with a barbed tail. wyvern are enemies. 
It's refreshing to find other people in this wood. I am Coran, thief and archer!
I've been alone in the wilderness for far too long. I wouldn't mind returning to the big city, but I have yet to collect my bounty. I'd share the reward with the lot of you if you would help hasten the hunt.
The deal is this: I've been hired out by the mayor of Beregost to hunt down a great winged dragon that's been plaguing the caravan routes. He's offered 2,000 gold for its head. Now before you get cold feet, let me allay your fears. The only descriptions of the beast have always mentioned its deadly barbed tail. From what I know about dragons they don't have barbs on their tails  that's something unique to wyverns. So all we have to do is find this wyvern's nest and kill it. Our only worries are if it has friends over for dinner!
We shouldn't tarry any longer; let's collect the head of this soon-to-be-sorry wyvern.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Eldoth. I am a traveling bard. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a big city. Skie is present in Baldur's Gate. Skie is Eldoth's female lover. Entar Silvershield is present in Baldur's Gate. Entar Silvershield is one of the dukes of Baldur's Gate, and Skie's father. 
I'm Eldoth, a traveling bard. Pleased to make your acquaintance. You look like the type to be on the outlook for ways to improve the quality of your life.
Well, I have a proposal that could help you in that endeavor. You see, there's a girl, my lover in fact, who desires to escape her father and live on her own. Her father is Entar Silvershield, one of the dukes of Baldur's Gate. This, of course, makes her desires more difficult than that of the average city girl.
However, with your assistance, we could help her escape the tyrannical clutches of Entar. Here's the punchline: Since Entar's going to be hunting us anyway, we can blackmail him for hoards of cash and not worry about our captive escaping. After all, we're doing it all for the sake of Skie.
Now, we needn't go about this right away. In fact, I'll help you with whatever you're doing until you decide to head up to Baldur's Gate. Just think of it as one favor deserving another.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Ludrug. I am a gnoll. gold is an object. 
Stop! You have trespassed on our territory. You shall not be allowed to leave until you have paid tribute. We demand 50 gold in tribute!
No money? That is too bad for you. We let you go only if you win fight. Your best champion versus our best champion. Our best champion is Ludrug. Ludrug is me. Are you ready for fight? No matter, we fight now!
If you lose, you must die! If you win, we must let you pass! Tread carefully, we will be watching you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Scar. I am second-in-command of the Flaming Fist. the Flaming Fist barracks is a location. Scar is present in the Flaming Fist barracks.  is a location. 
It is I, Scar, second-in-command of the Flaming Fist. I have another job you might be interested in. You'll be well paid for your services.
The problem is this: Every night people have been disappearing from the streets of the city. My men have been scouring the city trying to find the culprit, but so far to no avail. People have begun to get scared, and very few are willing to leave their homes at night. Something has to be done, and quickly. Would you be willing to take the job? I'd pay you 300 gold in advance with a 1,000 gold bonus if you discover what's been happening with the disappearing citizens.
Your job is really simple. All I want you to do is patrol the east of the city and find an entrance to the sewers. Perhaps you'll get lucky and find out what's been happening. If you do find out what's been happening, come to see me at the Flaming Fist barracks. Our only clue so far has led us to the sewers, so if you want to explore them first, it would probably be a good idea. Also, we've found tracks of some many-legged creature, perhaps a centipede-like monster.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Aldeth Sashenstar. I am a nobleman. a cabin is a location. Aldeth Sashenstar is present in a cabin. 
I am Aldeth Sashenstar. You must understand that at the moment, I'm under a terrible amount of stress.
You see, my dear friend, there is a group of uncouth savages that has declared their intention of killing my friends and me. I've been holed up in this cabin for several days and have lacked the wherewithal to try to make an escape.
My friends and I come here every year to do some sport hunting. This year however, a group of woodland savages threatened us with bodily harm if we did not stop our hunting trip. Being civilized men, we realized that it's well within our rights to hunt where we damn well please. After a few more days of hunting, the crass woodmen lost all pretense of humanity and murdered Elban, one of my oldest friends.
I'm sure that they plan to attack our cottage here, so we had best be prepared.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 1
 I am Aldeth Sashenstar. I am one of the principal shareholders of the Merchants' League.  is a location. the Merchants' League Estate is a location. Irlentree, Zorl Miyar is present in the Merchants' League Estate. Irlentree, Zorl Miyar is Aldeth Sashenstar's business partners. 
It is so pleasant to see your face once again. Don't you recognize me? It is I, Aldeth Sashenstar. I am so glad to have met you, especially at a time like this. I need to speak with you privately.
I'm sorry for all of this hiding and skulking, but there are dire events afoot. You know that I am one of the principal shareholders of the Merchants' League. Well, I share ownership of the company with two others: Irlentree and Zorl Miyar, two very distinguished gentlemen. When I returned from my hunting trip  thanks to you, I might add  I found that my two partners had undergone some profound changes, nothing physical or overt, but something far more sinister.
It's as if my partners had become wholly different people while I was gone. They almost take an active interest in squandering our company's resources on frivolous and stupid ideas. If they continue on this course, the company will be in shambles in but a few weeks. I know you have already helped me once, but I ask for your assistance again. I have no other recourse.
Come into the Merchants' League Estate with me. I will explain that you are an old friend of mine and will quarter you in the guest chambers. From there, please investigate my partners, perhaps using magic or any of the other skills you possess. Learn as much as you can during your visit and then report back to me after you're done. It should only take a couple of days.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Uder Mordin. I am a man who witnessed a battle between Vithal and a powerful opponent. a dangerous cave system is a location. Uder Mordin is present in a dangerous cave system.  is a location. the cavern north of here is a location. Vithal is present in the cavern north of here. Vithal is a powerful male mage, who was magically confined. 
I would be careful in this place, if I were you. Many dangers around many corners. You will be lucky to live. No real secrets for those that travel here frequently.
A trespasser got his due from someone he crossed. Well, I suppose it did not end in death, but it was a mighty battle regardless. I do not know who the aggressor was, but I know who lost.
That person was a mage of power, I am sure, though not powerful enough in the end. A pity too. He seemed intent on unearthing an artifact of old or some such.
And his reward for his effort? Worse than death, even though he seemed willing to share. Imprisoned, magically confined in the cavern north of here. Pity.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Vithal. I am a mage and adventurer.  is a location. Vithal's book of rituals is an object. 
Ahh! Thank you for releasing me. I'm Vithal, an adventuring mage. If you could aid me a bit, I would be forever grateful. There will be items enough for us both.
This spot is "thin," and careful spells may breach the walls between dimensions. On the other side, one might find some valuable magic, if one knows where to look. I cannot cast the actual dimension-breaching spells without the procedures outlined in my book of rituals. I imagine it was taken after I was imprisoned. There were svirfneblin observing my conflict: Perhaps they took it. I cannot blame them. I am sure I appeared quite permanently lost.
I believe there is a svirfneblin village to the north. They may have taken my gear there. If you go, tell them they may keep everything but the book.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Flydian. I am a messenger. Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a town. High Merchant is present in Trademeet. High Merchant is the mayor of Trademeet. 
I am Flydian, a messenger sent by the High Merchant of Trademeet to find someone to help our town.
Trademeet is under attack by forest animals. The High Merchant thinks druids may be responsible, but we haven't the manpower to find them and stop it.
The High Merchant will have more information for you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Anomen. I am a warrior priest. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is a city. Government District is a location. Government District is a district of Athkatla. Lord Cor's home is a location. Lord Cor is present in Lord Cor's home. Lord Cor is a nobleman, and Anomen's father. 
I am Anomen, a warrior priest.
I must discover the truth about my sister's murder. We must head for my father's home in the Government District of Athkatla!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Dawnbringer Sain. I am a priest of Lathander. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is a city. Jysstev estate is a location. Jysstev estate is in Athkatla, southeast section of the Government District. Sir Sarles is present in Jysstev estate. Sir Sarles is a gifted male sculptor. 
Greetings, I am known as Dawnbringer Sain, a priest of Lathander.
I am charged with the acquisition of art for the temple. The beauty of the dawn must be captured in every nook and cranny of Lathander's home.
Athkatla is blessed with the presence of perhaps the greatest sculptor of our age. The artist is known as Sir Sarles, and he is making an all too brief visit. We would be foolish not to seize upon the opportunity to have him work for us.
I would ask you to convince Sir Sarles that it would be best for him to work for us. Go to him now.
Sir Sarles is staying at the Jysstev estate. It is in the southeast section of the Government District.
Remember, you speak for Lathander in this matter.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Dawnbringer Sain. I am priest of Lathander. temple of Lathander is a location. Dawnbringer Sain is present in temple of Lathander.  is a location. Dawn Ring is an object. Dawn Ring is a ring. 
Good day, it's Dawnbringer Sain, the priest of Lathander.
I would ask a dangerous thing of you. You're free to refuse, but the greater glory of Lathander is at stake.
The Morninglord takes great pride in the artifacts of his rule. We have many items on display at the temple of Lathander, from new artworks to the aged relics of bygone days. Today we are one less. We are the victims of thievery, and our followers have been shaken by this vulnerability. Quick steps must be taken to rectify this.
We know the culprits; they have not concealed their crime. Talassans, slinking from their temple to degrade our worship, hired common thieves for the deed! They fear no retribution. The Morninglord cannot suffer his relics in the hands of such evil.
Find these thieves before the Talassans receive the items.
The spark of dawn has lit the way.
Go to the filth of the slums at night and intercept the delivery of our Dawn Ring. Bring it back to its proper place.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Talon Yarryl. I am a priest of Talos. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is . Sir Sarles is present in Athkatla. Sir Sarles is a good artist who is also a pretentious and demanding man. illithium is an object. illithium is an expensive material. 
I, Talon Yarryl, priest of Talos, have a mission for you!
Talos demands proper tribute, and that occasionally means artwork pleasing to the eye. If a piece of his fury can be represented, more might see and fear it.
An artist visits Athkatla now. The artist travels under the name Sir Sarles, though it is surely a fake. He is pretentious, demanding, and very good.
We must command a commission from him. But he is not being cooperative. His commission is outlandish, and he demands illithium as his medium! He may as well have asked for dragon tears.
Convince him to work for Talos. Use whatever means you must. Other churches are trying the same... if you cross their representatives, kill them.
Incur what debts you must, and use force where it will help. Stop at nothing. This man must realize there is no choice but to work in the service of Talos.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Talon Yarryl. I am priest of Talos.  is a location. Travin is present in the slums at night. Travin is a male thief. the Government District is a location. Stormherald Nallabir is present in the Government District. Stormherald Nallabir is a male priest of Talos. Dawn Ring is an object. Dawn Ring is a ring. 
It's Talon Yarryl, priest of Talos.
I have a chore for you that may prove interesting.
This is not a matter of negotiation or exploration. No, now you are to face true enemies of Talos.
Slanderous words have been said. Things did not go well for Stormherald Nallabir at this past tenday's theological debate in the Government District. The growing arrogance of the Lathanderian church is distasteful. Talos should be feared; their irreverence is insulting.
We have hired a thief, and he has stolen a Dawn Ring from the Lathanderian temple.
Find Travin in the slums at night, collect the ring, and return it here.
Remember that the honor of Talos rests upon your shoulders.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Renfeld. I am a man who has been poisoned.  is a location. the entrance to the large orange building is a location. Rylock is present in the entrance to the large orange building. Rylock is a man. 
My... my name is Renfeld...
*groan*
I have been poisoned...
I beg you to take me to... friends...
they have a building not far away from here... please, I beg you! It is a large building...
a large orange building in the southwest part of the Docks District.
There will be a man guarding the door... his name is Rylock. Please, take me to him...
I... I have nothing to offer you... aside from my gratitude and those of my friends.
Please... I do not have much time...

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
  is a location. 
Me a servant ogre. Now it time to fight!
You fight in the arena. Listen, I tell you what you need to know.
You trespass on the home of the mind flayers, and you got caught. Now you pay for your stay. Understand?
Next thing, you better fight well in the arena, because if you don't fight well, you die. If you don't fight at all, you die.
Oh, last rule, never attack the mind flayers. You are in their home. They kill you with their thoughts.
You will live if you fight well.
I warn though: Do not anger spectators. They extra strong in this place because of big brain.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Acolyte Byron. I am the player's tutor in the player's duties to Helm. temple of Helm is a location. Acolyte Byron is present in temple of Helm. 
Greetings, I'm Acolyte Byron.
I will be your tutor in your duties here as one of Helm's chosen.
You have many things you are responsible for.
As a favored of Helm, you will hear questions from those that seek guidance in their duty. They merely needed to be reassured that duty is above all, and that reverence for such duty is the way to happiness.
You will steer them on the true path to Helm's grace.
You have the wisdom that has secured your position within the church.
You will dispense it to those that are needy.
This is a sacred trust that you are given. Do not disappoint.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lara. I am the player's tutor in the player's duties to Lathander. 
Hello there, I am Lara, and I shall be your tutor.
Not that you need schooling, but you might be unfamiliar with the duties you are to perform.
In exchange for the many benefits you will enjoy as a favored of Lathander, you will have a few tasks to perform while here. They are humble, but very important.
You are to lend your wisdom to the wounded and afflicted, those that are suffering from a misdirection of the heart. Guide them in the light of the Morninglord's glory.
We shall introduce you slowly to the work. I shall send you someone that needs the guidance of Lathander, and then we shall evaluate how you have done.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Acolyte Vilon. I am a priest of Talos, who hands the player the player's duties to Talos. 
Chosen of Talos! Over here! I, Acolyte Vilon, have words for you about your duties within the church!
As a favored of Talos, you will hear questions from the mewling dogs that seek the guidance of the Storm Lord. These weaklings seek guidance, and you are to give it. These worms are barely worthy of stepping upon the floor of the house of the Storm Lord! Nevertheless, you will hear them!
We all take our turn guiding the foolish. I shall send a few your way, and if you do well, perhaps you will not need to speak to any more. We shall see.
For now, guide them in the way of Talos. You must do what is best for the church, and that is all. Anything less and you will have your honors stripped.
Clear?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Coran. I am the player's old friend, and a strong warrior. Forest of Tethir is a location. Coran is present in Forest of Tethir. Forest of Tethir is a location. Forest of Tethir is a forest.  is a location. 
Hail, good friend! I am most pleased to see you here! Your timing could not be better, as I, Coran, am in most dire need!
I was traveling Forest of Tethir with my beloved Safana... and now she is kidnapped! It is dreadful! Two days ago, we were beset by giant wolves... wolfweres, I fear. They tried to take us both, but I was able to escape. Safana, however, was not so fortunate. I tracked them to an encampment east of here, but even a great warrior such as myself cannot beat them alone.
We must save her and strike a blow against the foul werebeasts! Together, we shall be unstoppable!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lord Logan Coprith. I am the High Merchant of Trademeet. Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a merchant town. Calimshan is a location. Calimshan is a country.  is a location. Ihtafeer is present in the next room. Ihtafeer is a rakshasa. 
My name is Lord Logan Coprith, and I am the High Merchant of Trademeet.
A group of Dao genies from Calimshan arrived to Trademeet a while ago. They and their gold were welcome enough at first... But in only weeks, they have taken all business and put a stop to it. They are hunting a rakshasa named Ihtafeer and insist that she is present in the town.
The genies will allow no trade to occur until Ihtafeer is found and her head given to them. Why... why they have chosen this particular tactic, I am unsure.
Without proper trade, however, the merchants are penniless. Soon, the food resources will dry up as well, so something must be done... and done soon.
Perhaps you might be able to look into this genie issue for us? Guildmistress Busya in the next room can tell you more about what needs to be done.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Giran. I am a young boy.  is a location. 
sniff* My momma's still inside. They says she can't come out. My momma went into the tent to see a circus show. But somethin' happened, and now nobody comes out. There's guards who won't let nobody in anymore, too. But my momma's in there!
I want my momma! Please find her, please!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Tirdir. I am a distressed man. the graveyard is a location. Tirdir is present in the graveyard. 
Thank you for saving me! I'm Tirdir. I was buried by the men who kidnapped me!
*cough* They held me for ransom from my family, and after my family had paid, they knocked me out. I remember being carried here and thrown into that grave next to another body! And then they buried me alive! *cough*
I don't know their names. There were three of them. The youngest carried me here. He dressed all in red... strange and bright as you please.
I woke up with this in my hand. I think I must have torn it off his shirt when he threw me in the grave. Perhaps it will help you find him.
You must stop them! I beg of you! There was someone who spoke to this man. Perhaps the gravekeeper. You should talk to him at least... he must have seen something!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Jermien. I am a Cowled Wizard. the blood of a mimic is an object. 
I am none other than Jermien... licensed Cowled Wizard for this region.
I am working on a golem of stone! A fine piece of magical craftsmanship, if I do say so myself! Few other mages have made the attempt, you see. This type of golem is quite powerful and dangerous... but I am more than skilled enough to control it. Once it's complete, I'll have an excellent servant.
Trouble is, I'm missing one of the crucial ingredients... the blood of a mimic. I'd pay handsomely for some, in fact. Hmmm... you look like the adventurous type... care to find me some?
Hmm. I seem to recall that I've got a magical sword around here that I won in a bet from a certain fool. I've no use for it, but it's valuable. Find me some mimic's blood and it's yours.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Xzar. I am an enemy of Harpers, and a pompous man.  is a location. 
My friend Montaron has been taken captive by those irksome Harpers. I would have you enter their building and find Monty for me. Short... halfling... thief... even one of your intellectual capacity can't miss him.
Go to their building and return once you have found him.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Renal. I am one of the leaders of the Shadow Thieves, nicknamed "Bloodscalp".  is a location. Gorch is present in the storefront in the central docks. Gorch is a male storekeeper. 
My name is Renal, as I'm sure you've been told. Renal "Bloodscalp"... a little nickname I've earned over time. Rather grisly, but it keeps the fearful in line.
One of my guild houses to the south is run by a rather ambitious fellow named Mae'Var. Good thief, but I never liked him. Now I know why. I've had some hints that he is getting too big for himself. Thinking of taking my place, I suspect, but I've had no real evidence to say that this is so.
I will give you papers saying you were being transferred by the Shadowmaster. You will spy on Mae'Var from the inside and find me the evidence that I need. You'll need to reassure Mae'Var, naturally. He won't know who you are, but I am confident that you are more than capable of this.
Just head to the storefront in the central docks area and speak to the storekeeper, Gorch. Show the papers to him, and he'll let you in the guild house proper.
I think you will find the reward adequate. 10,000 gold is no small fortune, though I think you deserve a little more. From my personal armory, a sword.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Raelis Shai. I am leader of the troupe of bards and actors.  is a location. Mekrath's lair is a location. Haer'Dalis, sparrow is present in Mekrath's lair. Haer'Dalis, sparrow is a male actor in Raelis Shai's troupe. Mekrath is present in Mekrath's lair. Mekrath is a greedy wizard. 
I am Raelis Shai, the leader of this merry troupe.
The vagaries of fortune blow an ill wind over us. One of our members is absent due to circumstances we cannot control.
You must hear our story. One of our actors, Haer'Dalis, has been kidnapped by a wizard native to this city... he has made no effort to negotiate with us. The wizard's greed may have called to him at the sight of Haer'Dalis's beloved gem... something our sparrow would not gladly surrender. So this wizard has stolen both away, and there is nothing we can do. I would ask that you return our sparrow and his gem to us both, by whatever means possible.
The wizard's name is Mekrath, I believe... I know that his lair can be accessed through the city's sewers, though where exactly it lies is a mystery.
We are but a destitute troupe of players, child, and can afford little. Mekrath may have treasure of his own... Wrest it from his grasp if you wish to do so.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Malaaq. I am a djinni. Plane of Air is a location. Plane of Air is realm of genies. 
I am djinni Malaaq and I have been bound by a wizard to guard his items, and your item it seems. I can sense your touch upon this weapon.
If you can secure the means of my release, I will give you your weapon.
I was captured in my home, on Plane of Air, by some wizard. He bound me to this flask that I might guard his things. You must find my original flask and bring it back to me. Once it is within my grasp, I can break the enchantment and be freed.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
  is a location. Nilthiri is present in along the path to the east of the troll mound. Nilthiri is a shamaness, and the leader of the trolls of the troll mound. 
I am the spirit of the grove, child. I am the water, the earth, the trees, and the sun. I am life and death: the eternal cycle.
A druid who serves the cause of balance is needed. The grove requires leadership, a gentle hand. Will you serve the grove as such? There is much work to be done. Listen and learn the path of balance, the path of the Eternal Cycle.
Long have the trolls of the mound lived beneath the protection of the grove. But a new leader has arisen. Nilthiri the shamaness leads the trolls to chaos. She urges them to expand their territory, and she brings more trolls to the mound without thought to the consequences. If this continues, the trolls will overrun the grove, and nature will suffer. A servant of nature must bring the life cycle of Nilthiri to a close for the good of all.
You will find Nilthiri along the path to the east of the troll mound.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a town. Loren is present in Trademeet. Loren is a young boy, and a descendant of Marek of Halruaa. 
It is I, the spirit of the grove, child.
Child of nature, you are again needed. Balance is threatened, and Chaos is at the periphery. Will you serve the grove?
The grove is young in terms of nature and ancient in the years of man. Centuries ago, Marek of Halruaa established a protectorate of nature in these woods. Now, as Marek knew would someday happen, his descendants have returned and old enemies marshal their forces. A child called Loren has recently arrived in Trademeet. This child is the inheritor of Marek's spirit, but does not yet have the knowledge to use his power. Surely he shall be slain by the forces of chaos if you do not rescue him. Even now he is alone and in danger, his parents slain by an evil that haunts him. You must find the child Loren in Trademeet and fight Marek's old enemies to save the child's life.
The spirit that once was Marek has gone forth to aid the child... but the spirit is not the power that the man once was and cannot hope to hold out for long. Aid him lest all be lost.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 Windspear Hills is a location. Windspear Hills is windy hills.  is a location. Ilyich is present in Irenicus' dungeon. Ilyich is the clan leader of Irenicus's duergar slaves. the south end of the Windspear Hills is a location. Fairy Queen is present in the south end of the Windspear Hills. Fairy Queen is the queen of fairies. 
We are the three dryads. You must help us get free of this... creature Irenicus! We are Irenicus's possessions, servants, and concubines.
You must get our acorns back from Ilyich, the clan leader of Irenicus's duergar slaves. He is somewhere within this dungeon. Please take the acorns to the Fairy Queen who lives in the south end of the Windspear Hills.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Jenia. I am a worried mother.  is a location. Tiris and Jenia's home is a location. Tiris is present in Tiris and Jenia's home. Tiris is Jenia's son. 
My name is Jenia, and I come to you on behalf of my son, Tiris. He is very frightened. Too frightened to even leave our home!
I beg of you to come and speak to him! To see what has frightened him so and perhaps help him!
Tiris is at our home, the one just north of the Alibakkar estate. Please come as soon as you are able to! I so despair seeing him like this! I know I am poor and have nothing to offer, but I beg you to help my son!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Darsidian Moor. I am a monster hunter.  is a location. skin dancer are a human-like creature that wears the flesh of a human. skin dancer are enemies. 
I am Darsidian Moor, and I hunt a creature known as the skin dancer, a man-like beast without true flesh of its own.
I must follow the leads I have found here and confront this creature once and for all. Will you aid me in killing this creature of evil?
The skin dancer's lair is just north of the east gate, in a walled-off section of town with an orange pavilion. I intend to travel ahead and scout out the area.
Meet me there as soon as possible... I could certainly use your aid.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Raissa. I am a terrified woman. Waukeenar Temple is a location. Waukeenar Temple is a temple. 
Y-you... you killed those monsters? It was so... horrible! They turned me, Raissa, into one of them: a skin dancer. Peeled my skin from m-my bones and... and now I've put it back! They turned me into one of them. He took my skin like it was some kind of coat and put it on. He told me that now I was a skin dancer too.
I... I cannot go anywhere like this! I can feel that magic, that evil, growing inside of me! Please, my noble savior... help me! Wh-when he was... taking my skin, the skin walker said the only way to stop the process was a spell of restoration. B-but he laughed, saying I would never receive it.
If... if you could find that spell, could you not cast it upon me? Maybe... maybe the temple superior at the Waukeenar Temple would have something!
I have no coin. I know such magic is very expensive... but if you could find it in your heart to save me, I would be eternally grateful!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Korgan Bloodaxe. I am a powerful warrior.  is a location. Book of Kaza is an object. Book of Kaza is a grimoire. 
I'm scouring for a band of desperate adventurers to aid me in a gallant task. Come and hear Korgan Bloodaxe's tale!
A fortnight past, me fellows and I were in the midst of obtaining an ancient text fer our patron when a skirmish visited our midst. Vile words, alas, became a lake of bloodshed. So it goes the sacred grimoire ne'er made it to our benefactor's hand. And now he awaits its arrival with a zeal reserved for a grog-blossom in an alekeg. The scuttlebutt is the pay is handsome and worthy of note  sacks of loot and odd magics. The volume sits not far from 'ere, and the bibliomaniac, he paces the floor in the meantime. 'Tis called the Book of Kaza.
The Book of Kaza is in some hobnail's tomb over in the lower crypts of the Graveyard District. It's nae abandoned, but rumors and half-truths only scare the young and infirm. Keeps the curious away, me guess.
Well... it'll take far more than a few shambling bags of skin and stitches to deter Korgan Bloodaxe from a king's ransom! A foolhardy jaunt into a hive of undead? How could ye resist?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Jarlaxle. I am the merry leader of the Bregan D'aerthe. pocket plane is a location. pocket plane is headquarters of the Bregan D'aerthe. lich are an undead wizard. lich are enemies. 
I am Jarlaxle, leader of the Bregan D'aerthe, at your service.
This is a pocket plane, headquarters of the Bregan D'aerthe, my mercenary band. I hoped the rope would bring you here, and I see that it has. Welcome!
There is a lich who has numerous gems that contain the souls of my men, and I want them back. Whether you kill the lich or not is up to you. Killing him would allow you to loot the tower, I suppose, but however you get those gems is of no concern to me.
Once you gather up the gems, I will use the rope to pull you back into the headquarters here. Easy enough, yes?
You shall receive a bit of gold, my friend, for your trouble.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Oisig. I am a cleric of Helm.  is a location. 
Greetings. I am Oisig, cleric of Helm.
I would speak with you. I would hire you as a mercenary in the service of Helm. I would prefer a person of faith, but you will be adequate.
Follow me to the temple of Helm. I will discuss what is required of you there. Do not take too long; Helm requires you now.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Oisig. I am a cleric of Helm.  is a location. Keldorn is present in the sewers. Keldorn is a male paladin of Torm, and an ally of Helm, who will assist the player in finding the Cult of the Eyeless. 
The task I ask will be treacherous, but you seem capable. Serve well, and you will be rewarded. Display any treachery, and it will be seen. Now to the task.
A cult of the eyeless has emerged: He of the Unsleeping Eyes must know of this cult. The blindness they promote is abhorrent to Helm. We ask you to investigate and identify the cult.
The Vigilant One informs us that the cult is underground and close, but we cannot see past the sewers. You must infiltrate it, as friend or conqueror. You must suffer the filth of the sewers to find the filth of the cult. They are not hiding amidst the pipes, so there must be a passage leading further away.
Our resources are thin at the moment, but an ally of Helm and servant of Torm is awaiting you in the sewers now. Seek Keldorn to serve with you. Faith guide you both.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Gaal. I am high priest of the One God.  is a location. item is an object. item is an artifact, a part of a rod. 
I am Gaal, high priest of the One God.
There is... something that you could do that the great one cannot, despite his vast power.
The Unseeing Eye knows of a valuable item in this area.
The item is a rod... or part of a rod, rather, that you will find atop a holy altar. I cannot tell you more than that. You must let your faith guide you.
If you were to venture below, you could prove your worth by retrieving this artifact for him. Do this, and I will allow you into our ranks and the One's divine presence.
I have a key I can give you... This will allow you entrance to the inner chambers through a door a short distance back the way you came, at the sewer passages.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Kalah. I am a bored genie. Kalah's riddle, the poorest have it, the richest need it, but if either were to eat it, they would certainly perish is an object. 
Aha! I see a wayfarer has come to amuse Kalah! You must answer a riddle, naturally, ere I will allow you to pass this bridge.
Here's the riddle, my friend: The poorest have it, the richest need it, but if either were to eat it, they would certainly perish. Tell me what it is!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Aerie. I am a scared winged elf.  is a location. 
M-my name is Aerie. I... work in the circus with my uncle, Quayle... I... I'm not a monster! I'm an elf, a winged elf... or at least I was... This... this covering you see is some kind of illusion, but if you believe in it, then it becomes real! P-please believe me! Now go before something happens to you, I beg of you!
If... if you're not going to flee, then maybe you can help free me from the chains that keep me bound in this form  and then maybe I can help you!
You... you need the key to these chains. But... but it won't look like a key! There are a couple of... commoners... in the north side of this chamber...
Don't be fooled by the illusion, though... they are monsters! They have a sword which is actually my key... if you get it from them, I can remove the chain and regain my normal form!
But please be careful! You... you can't trust anything you see here!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Delon. I am a frightened man. a large city is a location. Delon is present in a large city. Imnesvale is a location. Imnesvale is a village. Minister Lloyd is present in Imnesvale. Minister Lloyd is the male mayor of Imnesvale. 
My name's Delon. I was sent to f-find someone, but things have been gone all wrong! *sniffle* I've had all my money stolen, and I'm lost, and everyone's so mean. *sniff*
I was sent to find someone who could h-help my village, Imnesvale. Terrible things are happening there, and nobody knows what to do! Everyone says they seen strange b-beasts out in the hills. Everyone's so frightened! There's even t-t-talk that Umar herself has returned!
When you get to Imnesvale, talk to Minister Lloyd! He can tell you everything else!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Ginia. I am a woman. Brynnlaw is a location. Ginia is present in Brynnlaw. Brynnlaw is a location. Brynnlaw is a pirate town on an island.  is a location. near the docks in Brynnlaw is a location. Calahan is present in near the docks in Brynnlaw. Calahan is a male smuggler. Ason is present in Brynnlaw. Ason is Ginia's brother. Chremy is present in near the inn in Brynnlaw. Chremy is Desharik's lieutenant. Desharik is present in Brynnlaw. Desharik is a pirate king. 
I should begin with my name... Ginia. I grew up here in Brynnlaw.
Things have not always been like this. Brynnlaw was once a pleasant town, though my memories may be influenced by happier times in my own life.
Then the pirates arrived, led by the despot Desharik. Desharik had lost a war with another pirate king. Forced to this island, his ships invaded the town. They took our homes. Desharik killed our mayor and dumped his body into the sea. We were forced out into the streets.
My father could take no more injustice. He tried to get back into our house and was executed for breaking the law of the pirates. Once they've stolen something, the owner has no claim on it.
Desharik said that we would have to pay for our father's "crime." He gave us to Chremy, his lieutenant, as a reward for service. He put me to work as a courtesan for the drunken pirates. It's horrible, traveler! He says that he'll kill my brother Ason if I don't do it.
There is no escape for Ason and me. There is a smuggler who will take us, but we cannot afford to pay him. There is nowhere to run on this island.
Chremy can be found near the inn. The smuggler's name is Calahan. I hope that Calahan will take us with him when you kill Chremy. He will be near the docks. Please be careful!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lissa. I am a troubled mother.  is a location. Gerhardt is present in the basement. Gerhardt is a man. 
My name is Lissa. Something's wrong with my daughter.
Her name is Jaella. She's hurt, traveler. I don't know what's wrong with her. She just lies in bed staring at the wall. Won't even eat.
Please heal her. She's just a little girl. Please, you must go and find out exactly what Gerhardt knows about Jaella's condition. You'll find him in the basement.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Keldorn. I am a member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart.  is a location. 
I am Keldorn, servant of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart.
My tasks for the church too often keep me away, but my estate is in this district, along with my wife and daughters. Would you like to come? I could introduce you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Keldorn. I am a betrayed man, and the player's friend. Athkatla is a location. Keldorn is present in Athkatla. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is a city. Mithrest is a location. Mithrest is an inn in the Promenade District of Athkatla. Sir William of Thorpe is present in Athkatla. Sir William of Thorpe is a foreign noble, and a good man. 
My wife has been seeing another man. Sir William of Thorpe... He's a foreign noble establishing trade here in Athkatla. He was a good man  at least I always thought so until... until now.
My friend, let us bestow some justice. Sir William has challenged my honor. There must be a reprisal.
We must make haste to the Mithrest in the Promenade District. I cannot live like this for long.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Roger. I am a shady merchant. the sewers is a location. Roger is present in the sewers.  is a location. sea troll are enemies. 
Hmmn. I don't remember seeing you down here before. Me name be Roger.
Oh, the sewers aren't so terrible. The guards don't be comin' down here, and my customers like to be somewhere... out of sight. 'Tis the beasties that are the biggest problem, especially of late. There's this sea troll. People have 'em as pets, and when they grow too large, they huck 'em down here to torment me.
I suppose I could part with a few coins for the deed. I tell you what... dispose of the sea troll beastie for me, an' I'll be pleased to pay you 500 gold pieces, aye?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Vittario. I am a poor teacher. Delosar's Inn is a location. Delosar's Inn is an inn.  is a location. Dennis is present in Delosar's Inn. Dennis is a big man with big friends. 
I, Vittario, be in some need of assistance, me pal. There be a fellow within Delosar's Inn there... Dennis. He owes me a good deal of coin, an' refuses to pay!
He promised to pay off me bar tab, he did, in exchange for some lessons on the gong. Well, I teached him, I did... an' now he refuses to pay me tab!
Ehhh, well I be kicked out of Delosar's for not having my tab paid. Dennis be a big fellow... with big friends. I need some muscle behind me if I'm t' go within.
Come... follow me inside o' Delosar's, and let's have a little talk wi' Dennis, aye? I do believe he is on the second floor.
I be a poor, poor man, me pal... I have almost nothing to offer ye. I beg ye to help a destitute teacher find some justice!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Dennis. I am a warrior. Riatavin is a location. Riatavin is a city.  is a location. Roger is present in the sewers below the city. Roger is a fence. Dennis' family gong is an object. Dennis' family gong is a gong that belonged to Dennis' mother. 
I be Dennis... the leader of mercenary fellows out o' Riatavin.
Me gong was stolen. The gong belonged to my mother... it was her dowry and worth a great deal of coin. A damnable lout stole it before my gong lessons were even finished!
The lout sold it to a fence by the name of Roger not too long ago, I do think. He lives in the sewers below th' city, although I knows not exactly where. He might still have it.
Please find me family gong!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Dawnlord Arenthis. I am a member of the church of Lathander. next to Dawnlord Arenthis is a location. Risa is present in next to Dawnlord Arenthis. Risa is a shy, sad, young girl, and Dawnlord Arenthis' charge. 
I am Dawnlord Arenthis of the church of Lathander... excuse my young charge. Risa doesn't talk much since the recent death of her parents.
There is very little that can be done for her as well... other than to put her into an orphanage, I suppose. She is so shy and sad, though, I am sure it will do her no good.
If only there were someone who would care for her. Might you know of someone who would make a suitable guardian?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Madulf. I am the peaceful leader of ogres, who used to be a leader in the army of Sythillis. Sythillis is a location. Sythillis is a great southern empire. Imnesvale is a location. Imnesvale is a human village. 
Me Madulf... lead fellows from great army of Sythillis in the south. No want to kill races no more. Lead fellows in desertion. We just wants be left alone.
Always Madulf and fellows be chased and hated 'cause me an ogre! We just wants to be left alone. We come here one moon ago, tries to settle for a while, yes?
We needs you bring word to human village... humans run when Madulf goes, so me needs youse to do it for me. Youse bring word, yes?
Madulf no want death... Madulf no want fight. Just want peace. You tell villagers, maybe, that Madulf and fellows will protect village... protect from orcs in mountains, yes?
We have shield to give you... is magic, from Sythillis's army... we no use. Maybe you like.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Teos. I am a Cowled Wizard. outside the sphere-like building is a location. Teos is present in outside the sphere-like building. 
I am Teos, a Cowled Wizard, and I have been assigned to offer you... a special deal.
You just recently took this sphere, and by all rights we should have it, but my superiors said to offer an alternative. It would seem we have need of you.
That said, they would like to offer an exchange. You may operate in this awkwardly placed sphere if you agree to certain duties for the Cowled Wizards.
It is simple: You may have this place and act freely as a wizard. In exchange, you do the odd task for us, acting when we can't because of political or other reasons.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Nalia de'Arnise. I am a noblewoman. de'Arnise Keep is a location. de'Arnise Keep is the home of Nalia de'Arnise, a castle under siege. Daleson is present in de'Arnise Keep. Daleson is a man. 
I, Nalia de'Arnise, need a strong hand to help me. My land is under siege, and none of this rabble will aid me! And after all I've done for their kind, too! Please, can you assist me?
There is no time! I only hope that the attackers have not made it inside. If they have... if they have breached the inner courtyard, they will be hard to rout.
I will tell you what secrets I can. Perhaps you will be able to sneak in and attack from a more vulnerable spot. I hope Father is all right. He... would not leave.
Please, hurry to the de'Arnise Keep and find Daleson.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Khellor Ahmson. I am a guard.  is a location.  is a location. the Government District main building is a location. Corgeig Axehand is present in the Government District main building. Corgeig Axehand is Officer Roenall's commander. Barg is present in the docks. Barg is a suspicious man. 
I am Khellor Ahmson, a mere guard.
I saw what happened, and I share your helplessness. Any complaints about Officer Roenall must first go THROUGH him, so you can imagine how many get through.
This did not come from me, for if my indiscretion against Roenall were to get out, I should be thrown from the military. There is one way you can get to him.
Roenall is quite corrupt and more than willing to exercise his power. You are not monitored as we, so you can do something that I or another guard cannot.
Look to the docks and a man named Barg. Examine him and what he does, and you are sure to see what I mean. You might also wish to pry into Roenall's personal records. They may reveal something of his fondness for gems. I did not tell you this... and I certainly did not say his records are in his home northwest of the main government building in the Government District.
Think on what I've said, and bring anything you learn to Corgeig Axehand in the Government District main building. He is Roenall's commander.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am William Reirrac. I am a knight of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart. Umar Hills is a location. Umar Hills is hills. 
Welcome. I, William Reirrac, have been awaiting you. You should know the particulars of your service here and what being a member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart really means.
You are aware of the conflict with the Sythillisian Empire? There have been invasions into Amnian lands. We have been monitoring outposts, and all is not well. One outpost reported an imminent attack because an enemy unit needed their supplies. A runner barely made it with the information, and we fear the worst.
You must leave immediately for the furthest lengths of the Umar Hills. You must join the combat and rescue our knights, for they are surely outnumbered.
Go, and rescue whom you can. You have little time.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am William Reirrac. I am a member of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart. a neutral meeting place is a location. a neutral meeting place is a tavern in the Umar Hills, in the village of Imnesvale. Metrich is present in a neutral meeting place. Metrich is a local male baron. 
Knight, we have been commissioned by a local barony. Such service to political figures is good for the Order, and you will serve quite well in the task.
It is necessary for us to be accessible in local concerns lest we seem above the people. In this case, a baron has petitioned us to solve a land dispute. Baron Metrich wishes some squatters removed and has cited violence against his men as reason for it. Go to his lands, restore order, and bring favor to us.
The baron waits in a neutral meeting place. He is in a tavern in the Umar Hills, in the village of Imnesvale. Go now.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am William Reirrac. I am of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart. Baldur's Gate is a location. Baldur's Gate is a big city.  is a location. Tyrianna is present in safe house. Tyrianna is a noblewoman, one of the Morningales. 
I have a vital mission for you that must take precedence over all else.
We have received word of a great atrocity, one that must not be completed. There has been... murder is too weak a word. An entire family has been decimated. The Morningales have been a model of decency in this city, and their work in opposing the slave trade has earned them renown across the land. It also earned them many enemies. This past tenday has seen the family murdered in their homes, almost to the last. It would seem they were made examples of.
The time for justice will come, but what is important now is that someone survived, praise Helm. Tyrianna  she hid in a cellar while all others were executed. She must be protected until escorted from the city. Her survival will be a symbol to persevere in the fight against slavery, despite the ferocity of the enemy. You will go to a safe house we have set up, and you will make sure she remains secure. It is as secret as we could make it, though nothing is ever absolute.
In the morning, her godparent will arrive. He is from Baldur's Gate and will accept no other guards besides his own. You will see that she reaches his care. Go to the building beside the temple in the docks and await him. She should be safe in his care. Hurgis Baltezan is his name, and a more upright citizen you will not find. He earned the title "Hand of Torm" in his service to the god of duty.
The Order shall reward you with a suit of powerful armor for your good works.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am William Reirrac. I am of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart. Windspear Hills is a location. Windspear Hills is hills. Firkraag are a red dragon. Firkraag are enemies. 
Greetings. It is William Reirrac of the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart and I believe it is time for you to perform one final task, if you are willing.
There is an item, a holy artifact, that lies within the hands of a great evil. Firkraag, the great red dragon, looms over the Windspear Hills. His reign must end, and from his lair you must retrieve the most holy of blades, the Holy Avenger. This tool of good has been in his possession for too long. Knight, I call upon you to slay the dragon and make a statement for right and justice.
The blade will be rescued, but so shall the lands that he rules. This is a great risk, but it must be dealt with sometime. Go, and may the forces of good be your salvation.
Accomplish this, and I can think of no one more worthy of wielding the Holy Avenger. In your hands, such a blade will strike deep to evil's heart.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Wellyn. I am a ghost of a young boy.  is a location. inn in the slums is a location. Llynis is present in inn in the slums. Llynis is a craven thief. Littleman is an object. Littleman is Wellyn's stuffed bear. 
I... my name is Wellyn. I just want... I just want my stuffed bear back...
It's my favorite bear, Littleman... The bad man who came into our house... hehe hurt me, and he took Littleman with everything else... *sob* I can never go to sleep without Littleman! The bad man has it at that inn in the slums. The Copper something. *sniff* He's in one of those bedrooms in the back! I think his name is "Llynis"...
I've... I've gone to him... *sob*... I've tried to tell him that I just want my bear, please, but he just gets too frightened of me. *sob* Oh, please get it from him!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Mairyn. I am a spirit of this forest.  is a location. 
Good ranger! My name is Mairyn... I am a spirit of this forest, and I am in desperate need of your aid!
There are... other humans... in my sacred lands to the north of this place where the temple of the sun god once stood. They have come recently, digging and tearing down the trees... I have begged them to stop, good ranger... I have pleaded with them that they are destroying not only me, but many of the other forest spirits as well. The humans have refused.
I implore you... go to the forest in the north and do whatever you can to stop these humans from further desecrating my forest! You must go to them, and seek out the nature of their quest, if you wish. Whatever you do, however, you must stop them.
I... I have nothing to offer you, ranger, other than my gratitude. May Mielikki shine on you, good ranger.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Delon. I am a man from Imnesvale. Imnesvale is a location. Imnesvale is a village. Nelleck is present in Imnesvale. Nelleck is a man. Minister Lloyd is present in Imnesvale. Minister Lloyd is the mayor of Imnesvale. 
Oh! There you are, my noble ranger! It's me, Delon. I... I've been looking all over the place for you! You... you've got to come to Imnesvale!
There's orcs... big ones! Nelleck says he saw them coming down from the hills. Soon they'll attack! The Minister sent me to find you! Nelleck says that they'll be at the village soon... no later than three or four days from now. You've got to hurry!
I'll run back and tell Minister Lloyd that you're coming! Everyone will be so relieved!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Delon. I am a frantic man. Imnesvale is a location. Imnesvale is a village. Umar is present in Imnesvale. Umar is an evil female witch. Minister is present in Imnesvale. Minister is the mayor of Imnesvale. 
Hey! It's me, Delon. I... I've found you again, my noble ranger! It's... it's so hard to find you sometimes! The... the village is in danger again! The Minister has asked for you!
It's Umar! The witch! She's come back, and she's threatened to kill everyone if they don't go an' leave right now! The... the Minister says he will tell you everything!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Garren Windspear. I am a friendly man.  is a location. 
I'm Garren Windspear. What goes on here? I've seen many a strange thing in my time, but the events of the past few moments tops them all.
Who are you that can change shape so readily, and why have you slain these beasts that become men?
It appears that you have been tricked into killing these knights! Though the priests of Helm will not believe what has happened. They will seek justice, and only your head will suffice.
I suggest that you take sanctuary with me until you can discover how this unfortunate event came to pass. My cabin is but a short distance south of here. I will meet you there.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Garren Windspear. I am a man experiencing strong emotions. Garren Windspear's home is a location. Garren Windspear is present in Garren Windspear's home.  is a location. 
My daughter is gone! I left my home in your care! I... I... no, no, I know it was not you... I know who my enemies are. Damn that Jierdan Firkraag! What is his grief with me?! I don't know where you will find him. His hooligans prevent searching. I don't know... Perhaps the ruins in the northeast? I don't know...
Please rescue my child, no matter the risk. You will travel unmolested, for my pleas of your virtue were heard at the Radiant Heart. They demand justice for the slain knights, so that is your task now. Do this, and your honor shall be restored.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 
Greetings, Your Grace. I actually have a rather angry merchant by the name of Tolmas Bendelia that has been demanding to see you.
It might have something to do with his caravan being waylaid by bandits passing through the region, but he refuses to speak to anyone but Your Grace. He is an influential merchant in this area; I believe he owns the deed to more than one local farmhold. Will you grant this man an audience, my liege? I shall show him in.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Cernick. I am the player's captain of the guard. here with Cernick is a location. Lastin is present in here with Cernick. Lastin is a new male guard, and one of the player's subjects. 
Greetings, my liege. It is I, Cernick, your captain of the guard.
I am not sure if you have been aware, but we have been experiencing a number of thefts in the keep over the past couple of weeks. A goblet, some silverware, a few coins from the servants' quarters. All of these things have value, although none of them were major thefts.
Still... I investigated. Lastin here is one of the new guards. I caught him red-handed, attempting to take a necklace that belonged to the late Lady de'Arnise. Lastin has confessed his crime. I am unsure how to punish him, my liege, so I have brought this before you.
He is your subject, my liege, so yours is the right to decide punishment, but you are also... being watched carefully by those who oppose your rule, however.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Bolumir. I am a wandering priest of Tempus. 
My name be Bolumir, priest of Tempus, the god of battles!
Hahr... it has been some time since I have rested my feet in any place, to tell the truth. I've been wandering for many a year now. The traveling does wear on me, to tell the truth. I've come to ask if you've a chapel that a priest of Tempus might set himself up in... bring the good Word to the folk of the area.
What do you say, eh? If my manner does not strike you as offensive, I would be glad to be chaplain of your wee keep here. I can help your people here much while I stay. But I do not promise to stay for long. Either you accept me or you don't, my liege... that is your choice, and I'll not begrudge it you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Kangaxx. I am an undead man. a tomb is a location. Kangaxx is present in a tomb.  is a location. 
I am Kangaxx, and I have been cursed. I am dead yet not dead.
Cursed to eternal entrapment in this tomb by cruel enemies! Cursed to a fate worse than death! But the curse can be reversed! With your assistance, I may live again. I have suffered for so long... will you help me?
The fiends that did this to me keep me from returning by tearing apart my mortal form and keeping the pieces separated. You must find my body that I might again take mortal form. The pieces are very close! I have no doubt that they lie within the city in tombs such as this. My enemies are predictable if nothing else. Seek my arms, legs, and torso.
I will give you anything you want. Power, riches beyond number! Anything!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am imps. I am two mischievous, small demons. 
We are two imps, little demonic people. We want to play a game.
Okay, big peoples... this is how our game will go! There is five chests here with nothings in them! In front of each empty chest, a famous big people will appear! Famous big people! Oh, yes, powerful famous big people! Each famous big people will give you a gift that belongs to another famous big people... and they will hints to you what gifts belong to them! If you thinks you knows which famous big people a gift belongs to, you puts it in the empty chest behind them, yes? Very simple!
Once you places all five, you comes and asks us! If you wrong, we laugh at you! If you right, we open the sixth chest! The sixth chest has all of the drow's treasure! All of it!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 the player's castle is a location. Chanelle is present in the player's castle. Chanelle is a female maid. 
Greetings, Your Grace. It is I, the majordomo of your castle. We have a small problem here at the keep, one that I doubt that you would be aware of at all.
I am unsure if you have met Chanelle... She has been a maid here most of her life. She was an orphan, and the de'Arnise family took her in as a servant when she was young. As the ruler of the keep, you are technically her guardian. Ordinarily, that would not be a problem, but there are two men who desire her hand in marriage. It is... up to you, my liege, to give her away and decide which of the men has your blessing for the marriage.
I shall bring them in to see you, my liege. If you do not resolve this issue, then... no one shall be permitted to marry Chanelle. And I am sure that is not what she wants.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Higgold. I am enthusiastic director of theatricals, musicals, and other entertainments, from Calimport. Calimport is a location. Calimport is a city. 
Greetings, greetings, greetings! I am Higgold, director of fine theatricals, musicals, and other entertainments. Most recently from Calimport, where I needn't return quickly due to the sensitivity of one particular huzzah...
..but we needn't get into that. Now, let's see... yes, mm-hm... yes, this looks like a fine playhouse. I know a few actors that aren't working, but it'll take some time to find them, as well as a worthy play to put into production. A week for that, I think. About six weeks after that for rehearsing and then this playhouse of yours should start making decent coin, so long as all goes well.
Your part, my good friend, is to provide the investment to stage the play as well as make important decisions. You'll also reap the majority of the profits. I'll start looking for actors and a play right away. It shouldn't take more than half a week, and I'll send word as soon as I'm ready to go.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Higgold. I am a theater director. "The Sorcerer's Bane" is an object. "The Sorcerer's Bane" is a grand epic about the pride of a great sorcerer and the love that is his downfall. 
It is good to see you again, my patron. I have managed to gather together a play as well as a troupe of actors, as I promised.
They are a fine lot. I have worked with some, and they should serve well. As for the play, I have come across a translated copy of, uh, "The Sorcerer's Bane." You will like it, my patron. A grand epic about the pride of a great sorcerer and the love that is his downfall. Seldom performed, but well attended when it is.
The only problem I am having is deciding who will play Karenina, the lead female role. There are two actresses in the troupe who are desperate for the part. I know them both well and cannot decide, so I shall leave the choice to you. Here... I shall introduce you to both of them, as well as the rest of the actors.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Higgold. I am the player's director producing the play. 
You... would not believe what has been occurring. We are finally making progress in rehearsals, and now... other things are happening... We've had props inexplicably fall from tables! A cistern broke and ruined an entire backdrop! An actress slipped yesterday and almost broke her foot! There's been other strange things, too... noises during the night, creakings and moanings. One of the stagers almost died falling out of the rafters!
All the actors are frightened; they believe the curse is assailing us, and I... am beginning to believe it too. Oh, what a fool I was to disregard it!
You are the patron of the playhouse... I need you to talk to someone who has offered to help.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Higgold. I am a frightened theater director.  is a location. 
Ah! Patron! This is unbelievable! There are... a group of Turmish fanatics in the playhouse! They have taken it over!
They charged in and scared the cast to death yelling nonsense about not permitting the play! They said they would sooner burn the playhouse than allow the show! And the dress rehearsal is supposed to be tomorrow! Gah! Patron, you've got to do something! Stop them, please!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Higgold. I am a seriously troubled theater director.  is a location. 
Ooooh... my patron... We have a real problem. A very large problem. A gigantic problem!
One of... one of the council members is here... or, at least, I believe he is one! On opening night! This... this could make or break the playhouse! And Zaren... Zaren is ill! Deathly ill! He cannot even move from his bed! I see only one chance... it's too late for anything else... You must play Velden. You are a bard, naturally gifted... you observed our rehearsals.
Please, my patron, I'm begging you! This could be the biggest chance for all of us! And... and we mustn't upset the council member! PLEASE, you must do it!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Jaheira. I am the player's angry, yet weary companion. Athkatla is a location. Jaheira is present in Athkatla. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is a city.  is a location.  is a location. Copper Coronet is a location. Copper Coronet is an inn in Athkatla. Ployer is present in Athkatla. Ployer is a fat male slaver, who hates Jaheira. Belgrade is present in Athkatla. Belgrade is a male merchant who helped to expose Ployer for his crimes. Bernard is present in Copper Coronet. Bernard is a male bartender. 
Ployer! That... that fat excuse for a slaver, he's cursed me! Damn him! If the curse was tailored to me, it might resist removal by normal means. I doubt Ployer would have done this if the solution were simple.
I have a few options. Ployer mentioned that he lived in squalor, suggesting he may be in the poor section of the city. Not likely to find him quick though. The mages with him wore odd colors that might be traceable. Ask at the government building, as all magic is regulated in Athkatla. If they will talk... He also mentioned Belgrade, a merchant that helped expose Ployer. He frequents the Copper Coronet, and the bartender Bernard might know his whereabouts.
My very bones ache today. It is as though I age on the inside. Ohh, this cannot go on for long. We must remove this curse!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Sir Ryan Trawl. I am from the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart. Bridge District is a location. Bridge District is a city district. 
Greetings, traveler. I am Sir Ryan Trawl. I have heard of you. I would like to offer you the opportunity to help the Most Noble Order of the Radiant Heart.
The task of being a paladin is not easy. Many break under the demands of our path and leave to pursue avenues of life more appropriate to their talents. Sometimes they bend instead of break, twisting their paladinhood to serve their own purpose. These are hard to detect, but when found, they are quickly cast out.
Recently, one of our highest-ranking officers was implicated in smuggling slaves. His name is Anarg, and though he was once a friend, he was expelled from the Order. We thought that the end of it, but Anarg took others when he left. He is a charismatic man, and some of the younger knights were swayed by his words. We could tolerate their loss, but they masquerade as paladins, abusing our good name. They extort, smuggle slaves, and spit on all that we honor. The Fallen Paladins, as they're known, would recognize any of our Order, and some also fear conflict with former friends, so we need outside help in this matter.
The Fallen Paladins always need warriors to aid their illegal activities. We want you to ally with them, especially Anarg. He's the key to them all. If you consider these men a threat, then do what you think is necessary. Gloves of Healing would be a suitable reward for the task, I think.
Anarg has kept their activities localized in the Bridge District. I suggest you search there. May Torm be with you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Danno. I am a distressed man who knows the player. Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a town. with the player's mother is a location. Pala is present in with the player's mother. Pala is the player's sister, and Danno's crush. 
Oh, Mazzy! Thank the gods that I've found you! I've hurt Pala!
You have to save her! I didn't mean to do it. I bought a love potion from Wallace the peddler at the market square. I just wanted her to love me. She only had a sip of it, and she collapsed.
She is with your mother, Mazzy. How was I to know it was poison? Oh, please hurry! I will meet you in Trademeet.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Quallo. I am a madman. sewers is a location. Quallo is present in sewers.  is a location. 
I'm Quallo, and this thing here is my friend.
You have come for the blade, I suppose. It is as we have always expected, my friend. (He glances to the creature beside him.) Too long in this pit, too long.
The gleam in your eye! It belies your greed, your passion. I've found this blade, child! It is hidden most insidiously. A cruel jest has been played upon us all. My friend here knows this!
The One has left clues for you. Have you not found the clues? Where the topside filth drains, there are the clues. Return to me ere you follow the One's path, for there is much that you must learn.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lieutenant Aegisfield. I am a worried guard. 
I'm Lieutenant Aegisfield. I'm warning everyone so as to get the word out that there are guards on the streets. We've had a... a string of killings, and I don't want any more happening.
Bandits I can understand; they are easy enough to figure out. What's happening here is... it's murder, but not like I've ever seen. There's a disgustingly sick person out there, and I simply don't have the manpower to protect everyone. He's been killing paupers, sometimes in the alley where they sleep. They have nothing to take. He kills them and that is all. Not only is it pointless, but he does it in as painful a way as possible. It's... it's sick. He flays them... alive. There has been blood all over the area.
I must go about my rounds. If you find any information about the murders, be sure to let me know. Don't go looking for trouble though.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Jaheira. I am the player's companion. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is a city.  is a location. 
Hail there! I said I would return, and I have. Sorry to have kept you waiting, but there were things I had to take care of. Now that we have met once again, there is something I must ask of you.
We must go to the Harper Hold in Athkatla. I have been asked to bring you, and we must go soon. They will allow us to pass the wards of the door, but I must be with you.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Therndle Daglefodd. I am a merchant and a worried father. 
I'm Therndle Daglefodd, a merchant.
My child, Bedlen Daglefodd, has been missing for a tunnel's worth of digging. I simply cannot work without knowing his fate.
Could you have a look for him?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lord Skarmaen. I am a nobleman who hates Lilith, one of the Alibakkars. Trademeet is a location. Lord Skarmaen is present in Trademeet. Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a town.  is a location. Lilith is present in Trademeet. Lilith is a noblewoman, one of the Lurraxols. Mantle of Waukeen is an object. Mantle of Waukeen is a large circlet. 
Hello once again!
It is pleasing to see that you did not respond to the call of that harlot, Lilith Lurraxol. The woman is too deluded to see the truth, as I said. A commoner that has risen above her station. Our two houses have been feuding for generations. The Lurraxols seem to be possessed of the notion that their family founded this town... what an absurd thought!
Why they would even presume to suppose such a thing, I have no idea. It is sad, however, that the Alibakkars have never had the evidence to prove our claim to them... though it galls me that we would need it. All that has recently changed. An old tome belonging to my family states that there is proof  that proof can be found right here in Trademeet. In the graveyard is a tomb that has been long abandoned... but which also houses the founder of the town. My ancestor. With him lies a large circlet called the Mantle of Waukeen.
Possessing that circlet would be all the proof I need, so I wish to acquire it. I would do so myself, but there happens to be a good reason the tomb is abandoned. It is... haunted, so they say. The exact nature of its danger I do not know... but you are a hero who surely could face its perils and return safely with the mantle, yes? In return, I shall pay you 1,000 gold. I shall give you the key, then, which will allow you into the tomb... the key itself having been in my family for some time as well. More proof, yes? Go, then, and return with the mantle.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lady Lilith. I am a noblewoman who hates Skarmaen, a member of the Lurraxol family. Trademeet is a location. Lady Lilith is present in Trademeet. Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a town.  is a location. Skarmaen is present in Trademeet. Skarmaen is a nobleman from the Alibakkar family. Mantle of Waukeen is an object. Mantle of Waukeen is an old gold circlet. 
Ah! It is the hero of Trademeet, come to see me at last. I trust that all is well? That pig, Skarmaen Alibakkar, did not speak too harshly about me, I trust? No matter. He is a stubborn, deluded fool. Our families have been at odds for generations, you see. The Alibakkars refuse to acknowledge the fact that we are the only true noble family in Trademeet, having founded it. Why they would think themselves higher than they are is beyond my ken. What is unfortunate, however, is that my family has never had actual, physical proof of the truth of our claim.
That has changed, however. A tome has recently been uncovered... an old tome belonging to my family... that states there is proof right here in Trademeet under our noses. In the graveyard, here in town, lies the crypt of the founder... my ancestor. With him lies the Mantle of Waukeen. A pretty name for an old gold circlet. That circlet, however, would prove my claim once and for all and shut those Alibakkars up. I would get it myself, but the tomb is haunted, you see. Here is the key to the tomb... the fact that we possess it is yet more proof of our legitimacy. Use it to enter and obtain the mantle, and then return to me when you are done.
You are a hero who might enter that tomb and retrieve the circlet for me, if you are willing. In return, I will pay you 1,000 gold. What do you say, my hero?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Bodhi. I am a courteous woman.  is a location. 
I am Bodhi, and I greet you warmly.
There is a monopoly in this town, and I intend to break it. I will ask you to weaken the "resources" of the Shadow Thieves. I wish a campaign of disruption, and you will begin it. There is a shipment of supplies arriving by boat. You are to... confiscate it.
I suggest you move against that ship coming in. They won't be at the docks for long, and if you do not get the cargo in the next few days, you will fail.
Farewell and good fortune.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Bodhi. I am a courteous woman, and an enemy of the Shadow Thieves.  is a location. Palern Flynn is present in on the second floor of the Shadow Thief guild house. Palern Flynn is a former male member of the Shadow Thieves. 
I will give you your next assignment.
The Shadow Thieves have other enemies besides me. Recently, they uncovered a traitor, and have been questioning him quite ruthlessly for some days now.
You will rescue him. He will be killed once they are through, so go quickly. They have him at the Shadow Thief guild house on the second floor. You know the building, I think? The man's name is Palern Flynn. Remember, if he dies, you fail.
Good luck.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Bodhi. I am a well-spoken woman who hates the Shadow Thieves.  is a location. Senior Armagaran Vulova's small house is a location. Senior Armagaran Vulova is present in Senior Armagaran Vulova's small house. Senior Armagaran Vulova is a man leading a merchant house, linked to the Shadow Thieves. 
Now I ask for a more specific task that will disrupt the Shadow Thieves further.
The task is... unseemly.
It calls for the murder of a man. Not a truly innocent man, but hardly a villain of epic scope. You must kill, blaming the murder on the Shadow Thieves. He is head of a merchant house, and his link to Shadow Thieves is blatant. If he were to die and certain gear were at the scene, it would implicate the guild we oppose.
Take this cloak and dagger, and go kill Senior Armagaran Vulova. When he is dead, put the cloak and dagger in the fountain in his house. He will die easily, though there may be guards. His small house is in the Government District, between the jail and the government building.
Go.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Bodhi. I am a well-spoken woman, and an enemy to the Shadow Thieves.  is a location. Aran Linvail's sanctum is a location. Aran Linvail, the Shadowmaster is present in Aran Linvail's sanctum. Aran Linvail, the Shadowmaster is the male leader of the Shadow Thieves. 
Again, I require your talents. Now to the task at hand.
It is time to take down the leadership of the Shadow Thieves and throw them into a more permanent disarray from which they may not recover. You must invade their lair one last time. You must kill Aran Linvail, the Shadowmaster. Do this for me, and our arrangement will be fulfilled.
Aran is in the basement of the Shadow Thief guild house, so you need a key. The lock is likely unpickable. What good is a lock in a thieves' guild if any thief can pick it?
One more thing: Tizzak, an employee of mine, is missing, and the Thieves may have him. Find him, and he may tell you how to access Aran's sanctum. Go now!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Madeen. I am a representative of Tolgerias. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is a city.  is a location. Tolgerias is present in the government building behind Madeen. Tolgerias is a man, and one of the masters of the Athkatla order of the Cowled Wizards. 
Greetings. I am Madeen. I represent one of the masters of the Athkatla order of the Cowled Wizards. He seeks to employ you in a matter of some urgency.
The matter is most sensitive... I have been given little knowledge of it. Tolgerias, the one whom I speak for, is eager to meet with you and discuss these matters.
Master Tolgerias can be found in the government building behind me... you may go within. Do not tarry overlong, my friend.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Tolgerias. I am a member of the Amnian Cowled Wizards. Athkatla is a location. Tolgerias is present in Athkatla. Amn is a location. Amn is a country. Umar Hills is a location. Umar Hills is an area in the wilderness. Athkatla is a location. Athkatla is the capital city of Amn.  is a location. Amnian is an object. Amnian is something or someone from Amn. 
I am Tolgerias, a proud member of the Amnian Cowled Wizards.
This matter must be handled with discretion and expediency. There is something that has been plaguing us for more than a week now and has become quite alarming.
You know of the prevailing attitude against magic here in Amn, yes? Well, amongst some it is even worse than that... a burning, palpable hatred. One particular man here in Athkatla has murdered two of our number in cold blood. He is currently in hiding, and we need you to track the fellow down. We have been unable to do so, much to our frustration. Cowled Wizards cannot be assaulted without repercussions or it will lead to... serious problems.
He is Valygar Corthala, last son of a wealthy family and a true brute. Ask around and you may discover if he is hiding within the city or someplace else. He has a home here in the Docks District, or he may have fled to the Umar Hills. His friends and servants will not speak to us, but they may to you.
We do not ask that you commit any murder. We wish Valygar be delivered to us, that is all. He will likely resist, so if you must kill him, so be it. But if you do kill him, I simply must have his body. Valygar must be delivered to us whether he is dead or alive. You understand, yes?

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Ama. I am a woman, and Shadowmaster of Eastern Esmeltaran. Eastern Esmeltaran is a location. Eastern Esmeltaran is a far-away land. Waukeen's Promenade is a location. Waukeen's Promenade is a marketplace. 
My name is Ama, and I am Shadowmaster of Eastern Esmeltaran.
I would like you to participate in a little rendezvous and help in the removal of a pest. There is a government official, Sir Greshal, causing us no end of trouble with his tariffs and spot checks on caravans. This fool thinks he can stifle the thieving trade of an entire city. He has been trying to muscle into a relationship with the Shadow Thieves, and while we could pay, it is better that we send a message to any of his cohorts. I have come here with a promise of granting his wishes, but I only want to lure him away from his palisade defenses. This is where you come in.
Sir Greshal wishes to be introduced to a contact here in the city, and that contact will be you. The meeting is already set up, and when he arrives, we will take him by surprise. You are known somewhat in this place, if not as a guildmaster. He will believe you are a legitimate contact. He seems willing to believe anything, so long as it is theatrical.
It will be any evening that is best for you. I will await you in Waukeen's Promenade after dark and then dispense a runner to get Sir Greshal. The suddenness will seem dramatic to him.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Mironda. I am a dwarven wild mage. Luiren is a location. Luiren is a country. Trademeet is a location. Trademeet is a town. Old Vyatri is present in Trademeet. Old Vyatri is a male innkeeper. Halfling's Help is an object. Halfling's Help is beer from Luiren. 
Name's Mironda. Pleased to see yer face and make its acquaintance. I'm no good with names; if ye can remember mine, ye've already beaten me. I forgot yers by the end of the first syllable.
Maybe it's the wild mage in me comin' out, but I can't stand not tastin' something new once in a while. Most dwarves will drink the same mountain swill from crib to dust-crib, but I'm always hankering for the latest brew. Old Vyatri in Trademeet was just getting a shipment from Luiren I'd dearly love to sample. If ye happen to run by his place in yer travels, get a cask of it for me and I'll pay ye well!
Can't wait to taste it. Halfling's Help, it's called  I hope it works on dwarves, too

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Captain Samand. I am captain of the Saradush guard. Saradush is a location. Saradush is a town under siege.  is a location. Mateo is present in Mateo's cell. Mateo is a young man, and a faithful soldier. Kiser Jhaeri is present in Saradush. Kiser Jhaeri is a vile male merchant. Countess Santele is present in Saradush. Countess Santele is a noblewoman. 
My name is Captain Samand, and I'm a very busy man right now.
A few days ago, someone opened a secret gate into the town  Saradush could easily have been overrun. We just discovered the traitor was a young man named Mateo. There's no doubt in my mind that *someone* betrayed us. The enemy came through a small sewer outlet that was protected by both a locked iron grate and several powerful magical wards. There is no way to open that entrance from the outside. But Mateo is a faithful soldier, not the type of man to betray Saradush.
An alarm was raised, and my soldiers arrived only a few moments after the gate was opened. We found three soldiers in the area: Mateo, Ardic Santele, and the merchant Kiser Jhaeri. We didn't get a chance to complete our investigations. Ardic, the son of the Countess Santele, disappeared. He was our primary witness. Our attention was focused on the vile Kiser Jhaeri, but we had no proof. Then the countess told us that Ardic, her son, had implicated Mateo before he disappeared.
If you wish to investigate further, I will not stand in your way. Speak to Mateo in his cell. The jailer will let you see him.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Lazarus Librarus. I am a wizard merchant with magical wares, and a newcomer in this town. Lazarus Librarus' store is a location. Lazarus Librarus is present in Lazarus Librarus' store. Tankard Tree is a location. Tankard Tree is the local pub. Hectan is present in Tankard Tree. Hectan is a known thief. 
Lazarus Librarus at your service. I would normally invite you to look at my magical wares, but alas, my shelves are completely bare. I have not even a single parchment left for you to purchase.
My spellbook has been stolen! Without it, I cannot fashion the powerful scrolls which normally fill my shop. Please, mighty traveler... I beg of you to help a humble wizard! At first, I suspected Hectan... he is well known about town for his sticky fingers. But after questioning many witnesses, it is clear that Hectan was at the local pub from dusk until dawn the night of the theft. I still suspect that no-good thief Hectan was involved  I can clearly see the guilt in his face! But there is no proof. Without my spellbook, I am virtually powerless to pursue this myself, and as a newcomer to this town, I have no one to turn to for help.
I regret that there is little else I can tell you. Hectan can usually be found in the Tankard Tree if you wish to question him.
I urge you godspeed.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 
We are elven refugees in dire need of help!
We have nowhere to stay... we have no choice but to wander the streets. I fear we will soon run into trouble with the soldiers of this town.
We have no money, and the innkeeper turned us away because he feared our wives would draw unwanted attention from the soldiers. Who else would have the heart and the room to take us all in?
Perhaps you can find someone willing to take us in? We would be truly thankful for your help.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Marlowe. I am a seriously troubled man.  is a location. 
Excuse me, I... I do not mean to be rude... but you *are* one of the strangers that all the locals have been talking about, aren't you? An adventurer from the north? Yes, yes, of course you are. Anyone can see that you are an extraordinary person. Please forgive me.
I would not bother you, stranger, but I am in terrible peril! I need your aid! I beg you for a boon or I and my daughter both shall surely perish! I... cannot speak more of this here. Please come to my home on top of the cliff, I beg you! We can speak freely there!
My home is atop the east cliff, adventurer. It is a simple dwelling but... safe, for the moment. My name is Marlowe... please meet me there and I shall explain everything, I swear.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Marlowe. I am a worried father, who used to be a successful merchant in Calimshan. Marlowe's home is a location. Marlowe is present in Marlowe's home. Calimshan is a location. Calimshan is a great city to the south.  is a location. the cavern is a location. Vongoethe is present in the cavern. Vongoethe is a powerful lich and wizard. Malla is present in Marlowe's home. Malla is Marlowe's daughter, and a pure, young girl. 
Welcome to my humble accommodations, adventurer. Will you hear out my tale?
As I said before, my name is Marlowe... I hail from Calimshan to the south, where I was a merchant. A successful one. I... suppose that is where I first came into contact with Vongoethe.
Vongoethe is a lich, adventurer. A powerful one. In Calimshan, there are many strange wonders of magic, and Vongoethe is not out of place. It is he who has chased us here, hunting us mercilessly. Vongoethe desired my poor Malla, my daughter. She is the young woman here on the bed. A... a good girl, a virgin and pure of heart. He desired her soul, he said, so I fled Calimshan with her. But he caught up to us nevertheless. And somehow he has taken her soul despite my efforts! She... she lies near death, and there is nothing the local priestess can do to help her. I know Vongoethe is in the cavern that serves as a graveyard in this place. I told the monks about him... but they sealed off the cavern rather than somehow getting my daughter's soul back as I had hoped.
Malla is the world to me! And I do not know how much longer Vongoethe will remain trapped in that cavern... he could already be loose! He will kill me and keep Malla's soul, I am sure of it!
Getting inside the cavern is not a problem. I... paid the guard there what little money I have left. I had thought to... try and get Malla's soul myself. But the guard will let in whomever I ask him to.
I have no coin left to offer you. I have bankrupted myself in trying to flee the lich's reach. But... Vongoethe himself is a powerful wizard. Surely he has items that would interest you, that you could take from him!

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Aran Linvail. I am a man leading a guild of thieves. thieves' guild hall is a location. Aran Linvail is present in thieves' guild hall.  is a location. Mook is present in the docks. Mook is Aran Linvail's female guard captain. 
Welcome to this place. I've looked forward to seeing you. I am, as you know, Aran Linvail.
Strange things are afoot on the docks. Shipments are disappearing, as are my employees with them. We are significantly weakened by this. I think it unlikely you would be captured or wooed to the enemy. If you go to the docks and bolster the guard on the shipments, it will strengthen our position.
Go at night, and you will find my present guard captain there already, a woman by the name of Mook. Take note of anything odd that happens.
Good hunting. Report to me if anything happens. Oh, and the reward I have set aside for you... I'll let you have some magical items. You will find them useful, I am sure.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Aran Linvail. I am a man leading a guild of thieves. thieves' guild hall is a location. Aran Linvail is present in thieves' guild hall. Five Flagons is a location. Five Flagons is a tavern in the Bridge District. 
Two of our men, Jaylos and Caehan by name, are planning to leave our little community and join with our enemies. Greener grass and all of that, I suppose.
They are to meet their contact on the second floor of the Five Flagons tavern in the Bridge District. Go there and pose as one of our enemy's new recruits. I want to know where our enemy's lair is. We have yet to find it.
This recruiter could arrive at any time so I suggest that you go to the Five Flagons now. They may prove unreasonable, so prepare yourself for hostility.
Return when you have the information we need.

This is a quest from Baldur's Gate 2
 I am Aran Linvail. I am a man leading a guild of thieves. thieves' guild hall is a location. Aran Linvail is present in thieves' guild hall. Graveyard District is a location. Graveyard District is a city district with a large graveyard. the rival guild's hideout is a location. Bodhi is present in the rival guild's hideout. Bodhi is an intelligent, brutal female vampire, and the leader of the rival guild. 
You were not the only one who was busy last night.
The leader of this rival guild, Bodhi by name, made a daring attack upon us. She can only be a vampire, and I suspect many of her servants are as well. The time has come to strike back to protect our people and the city she has invaded.
Go to the Graveyard District and find their hideout. There is a network of tombs beneath the graves where another spy tracked one of Bodhi's servants. There you shall find a set of blue doors just north of a spider den. The doors are too heavy for any mortal to open, but the vampires likely pass with ease. I shall send a mage to meet you there and arrange for the doors to be opened. Here, you shall need these stakes if you are to truly finish these creatures.
Be on your guard. This Bodhi is the most intelligent and brutal foe I have ever had. If we are lax in our vigilance, we will be at the disadvantage. When you have destroyed their evil, return to me and I will fulfill our bargain.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Thomas. I am a concerned village fisherman. a village is a location. Thomas is present in a village. Salmon Steps is a location. Salmon Steps is a nearby river rich in salmon. fish is an object. 
Traveler, I'm worried about my fellow villagers here in the village. I don't think that they eat enough nutritious, tasty fish.
Could you help me gather more? I simply can't catch enough fish for everyone, even if I'm a pro fisherman.
There is a river, Salmon Steps, bountiful in salmon near here. You could try your luck there, and catch 16 fish for me. I could pay you 32 shiny, green emeralds for the fish.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Matt. I am an annoyed villager. a village is a location. Matt is present in a village.  is a location. Ender Pearls is an object. Ender Pearls is spawn Endermites when thrown. 
Some incredibly foolish individual's been throwing Ender Pearls all over our village! Now the whole place is crawling with Endermites!
Could you take care of those little critters before they cause any serious issues? Kill them all, and receive 16 golden carrots for your trouble. You would have all our thanks, too.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Jesse. I am a thirsty villager. Desert Refuge is a location. Jesse is present in Desert Refuge. Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a village in a desert. 
Hail friend! It's good to see you. I'd offer you something to drink, but I'm running low on refreshments, and quite thirsty myself. We are in a desert, after all. There's not much water around...
Now that I think of it... You could actually help the whole Desert Refuge by obtaining us a permanent source of water! Build us a well, please. Ahh, I can already taste the fresh water on my lips...
I could give you this bucket of lava in exchange for a well. Just don't do anything mischievous with it, or burn yourself!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Nila. I am a greedy villager. a village is a location. Nila is present in a village.  is a location. 
What are YOU doing here! If it was up to me, I'd never let you in the village.
Perhaps you'd like to mend our relations? Bring me some gold ore, the more the better. You can never have enough of it; it's so beautiful. My gold. I wish to have it all to myself. Too bad it's mainly found in the ore veins deep in the ground.
I guess you could have these melon seeds as a reward. I have no use for them; melons have nothing on gold.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Paul. I am a cleric. Villager's temple is a location. Paul is present in Villager's temple.  is a location. diamonds is an object. 
My child, my temple could use a donation. I have to tend the sick and needy: I cannot procure all my potion ingredients myself. I often have to participate in rather complicated trades for the ingredients.
Please, help a humble servant of the Gods: bring me 9 diamonds. I know that they are rare, but you can find still find them in ancient ruins, and even deep within the Overworld itself.
I have a vast surplus of some potion ingredients that cannot be traded further: I can give you 64 Glowstone Dust for your time and effort.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Bella. I am a woman tired of regular food.  is a location. golden apples is an object. 
I'm sick and tired of eating the same boring, mundane food every day. I want to taste something a bit more refined. Something like golden apples.
Could you help a lady in distress? Bring me 5 golden apples to sample from, and I'll procure you a diamond block. That should leave a sweet taste in your mouth, as well.
Golden apples can be found in various dangerous corners of the world. If you don't fancy exploring, you can craft golden apples by combining an apple with gold ingots.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Mike. I am a man who wants to redecorate his home. red banners is an object. 
I'd like to redecorate my home. Stranger, could you do a man a favor? Obtain ten red banners and bring them to me. I have heard that you can craft banners from sticks and wool.
I'll have 32 apples for you.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Justin. I am a person who wants to give a gift to someone.  is a location. poppies, common red flowers is an object. 
You must be the hero I have heard so much about. I have a small task for you; it should be child's play for one such as yourself.
There is someone I really care about. I'd like to gift them some flowers, perhaps some of those nice, deep red poppies.
Please, bring me 32 poppies. You can gather them almost everywhere outdoors in plains and forests. I'll have 32 emeralds waiting for you...

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Mister Meek. I am a weak man. Potion of Strength is an object. Potion of Strength is a strength potion. 
You're the one who's been helping people, right? Well, now you could help me too.
You see, I need to get my hands on a Potion of Strength. I'm not the strongest person around: for once, I'd like to carry things around as if they were mere feathers.
Give me the potion, and receive a precious diamond in return.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Baba. I am a child. 
Hello. I'm Baba. My parents don't know how to tame animals. I want a kitty. You can have my allowance, 16 emeralds, if you bring me a kitty cat.
Can I please have a cat, traveler? You must know how to tame kitties.
Pretty please? Tame a cat and bring it to me.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Lee. I am a leatherworker. cyan dye is an object. 
I want to make my leather works more... dashing and colorful.
Bring me 16 cyan dye, and I'll reward you with 32 emeralds. You can make cyan dye by combining green dye with blue dye, I think. I'd obtain the dye myself, but the smell of my tanning chemicals attracts all sorts of unsavory creatures to me out there.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Sandy. I am a scared woman. 
*scream of terror* I.. I.. I don't want any trouble. Please, I just want to live my live in peace.
You're not going to kill me? Sinister master, may this mere woman ask a tribute from you? Please, I'd like to have a painting.
In return, you will receive 16 TNT, perfect for ramping up explosions (Preferably elsewhere).

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Baker. I am a sweet-loving man. 
My friend, as you might know, I'm not a man to say no to the sweeter temptations in life.
I'd be overjoyed, if you baked me a delicious cake and brought it to me.
I'm not leaving you hanging either: I have 3 golden apples for you.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Wilson. I am a worried man.  is a location. 
Oh. It's you. As if I wouldn't have enough to worry about...
Or perhaps even a devil like you has a heart. Would you help me sweep my worries away by bringing me a rabbit's foot? I'd like to feel luckier. Hunt down a rabbit. They are found in deserts, taiga forests, and frozen regions. Rabbits are quite quick on their feet, so they might keep you busy for a while.
Do this for me, and I'll give you a Potion of Leaping. That should help you jump out of my sight faster.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Tammy. I am a villager with wanderlust. a village is a location. Tammy is present in a village.  is a location. 
*sigh* I dream of leaving this tiny village every day. If only I had a horse... then I could go anywhere I want. Wherever my wanderlust takes me to.
Traveler, you must have covered a lot of land, learned many new skills. Please help me: tame a horse, and bring it to me. Horses are commonly found grazing plains, and their warmer cousins savannas. You can tame a horse by trying to mount it until it stops throwing you off its back. I'll pay a whole block of emeralds for it. Then I too, could take on the life on road.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Greta. I am a female villager. Hamlet-By-The-Grass is a location. Greta is present in Hamlet-By-The-Grass. Hamlet-By-The-Grass is a location. Hamlet-By-The-Grass is a village. 
My home is starting to look a bit drab. Could you help me redecorate my home here in Hamlet-By-The-Grass?
I don't know you that well; you definitely should come up with something fresh and interesting. Here. Take these decorations and place them in my home.
Afterwards, you can have this gold ingot.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Romeo. I am a man in love.  is a location. 
Great timing, Hero. I'm suffering... my poor heart is writhing in love.
Help me find a rose for my loved one, so that my heart may yet calm down. All I need is but a single rose. They can be found in various temperate forests.
Please, help a fellow in love. I have 27 pumpkin pies I can give you.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Caleb. I am a calm man. a desert village is a location. Caleb is present in a desert village.  is a location. 
I know of your dark deeds. I do not want any trouble from you.
However... if you have had a change of heart, I could use a little help. The hot desert air of this village is making me rather uncomfortable. I could stave off the heat, if I had some ice.
Tell you what, bring me ice, and you may still redeem yourself, villain, and net yourself 42 cacti. Ice is commonplace in snowy tundras, in frosted rivers.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Maria. I am a woman suffering from cold. a snowy village is a location. Maria is present in a snowy village. sticks is an object. wood logs is an object. 
Dear friend, this village is freezing cold, isn't it? This cold is turning my fingers blue, at least.
You are a highly skilled individual. May I ask you to craft a campfire or two? First, you have to collect some materials: 3 sticks, a piece of coal, and 3 wood logs.
After crafting the campfires, please give them to me. I even have something for you: 32 Blue Ice. It's slippery, blue-colored ice. I'm sure it'll prove useful to you, my friend.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Will. I am a mischievous child. 
Try to catch me, you big meanie! I bet you can't even carve pumpkins!
You wanna try to obtain a carved pumpkin and give it to me? I surely will not do any kind of pranks with it... like sneaking up on grownups... pinky swear.
Perhaps I'd even share my ten cookies with you. That should teach to to be nicer!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Nick. I am an armorer. sticks is an object. 
I just don't know where I could display my armors for sale. I know that there are armor stands that could do the job, but I'm way too busy hammering down new armors to actually go and hunt for the needed crafting materials.
You don't seem to have a day job, stranger. Could you help a busy armorer, and craft an armor stand? You could even have some of my blocks of coal for your reward. Ten blocks of coal in total.
You just need six sticks and a smooth stone slab to craft an armor stand.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Harry. I am a mason. wooden planks is an object. cobblestone is an object. Redstone Dust is an object. Redstone Dust is a crafting ingredient that powers up contraptions. 
You are the person who's been causing trouble in these parts, aren't you?
Why don't we put your energy to a better use? I'm a mason, which means that I have to move large quantities of stone from one place to another. I'd like to automate that process with pistons. That would save me from backache.
The problem is I don't have the materials for making pistons, or the know-how to craft them. This is where you enter the picture. Craft 10 pistons, and then bring them to me. I know that you need 3 wooden planks, 4 cobblestone, an iron ingot, and Redstone Dust for crafting a piston.
Some quarts pillars broke while we were transporting them. You could have the remaining 32 Nether Quartz from them.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Kevin. I am a curious man. The End is a location. The End is a mysterious, hard to reach dimension. Chorus Fruits is an object. Chorus Fruits is strange fruits that might teleport the player a short distance when eaten. 
Traveler! Did you know that our dimension is one among many. There exists a dimension called "The End". It is a mysterious place, and supposedly hard to reach.
I yearn to know more about that dimension. I have heard vague rumors about fruits native to the End that might teleport you a tiny distance when digested. They are called Chorus Fruits.
If you get your hands on six Chorus Fruits, I promise to reward you well with 12 diamonds. Please help a man sate his ever-growing curiosity.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Lou. I am a nitwit. 
Gee! You okay? *looks at you with a blank expression* You look a dark human-thing.
Me think me know the right think to cheer you up! A quest. Me want one of those music disc thingies. Find one?
Get 6 blocks of emerald in return.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Miles the Moron. I am a nitwit. Wide Woodland is a location. Wide Woodland is a large forest. 
Me happy. See a friend. Hello friend!
Me would like me own wolfie. Could help me do things... Wolfies like Wide Woodland. A biggy forest. Tame a wolfie. Bring it to me. Me give you pumpkins. A load of pumpkins.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Carl. I am a cartographer. Spruced Hills is a location. Spruced Hills is a region of taiga hills. 
I raise my face from my maps for a moment, and there you are! Just as I need the help of a trusted friend.
There are many, many regions in this world: mapping them all out is a tremendous task. I ask you to map out one of them: Spruced Hills. It is a taiga hills region, which means that there might be some rather steep hills covered in spruces and snow.
After making a map of Spruced Hills, come back here and give the map to me. I shall give you a spyglass, a fine tool for an aspiring cartographer.
Travel safely! Being mindful of your surroundings is an important skill for everyone, not just us cartographers.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Cocoa Hamlet is a location. Cocoa Hamlet is a village in a jungle. 
I almost didn't see you there, Hero. I'm succumbed in deep, dark thoughts at the moment.
Someone's been spying on our village for quite some time. I personally spotted that suspicious individual coming here around dusk.
Perhaps that person is plotting something malicious, perhaps not. Regardless, I'm worried that something bad might happen to Cocoa Hamlet. You, Hero, are the right person to find out what that suspicious person is up to. The jungle can hide many dangers in its deep thickets of trees and vines. Find and follow the suspicious person, here in Cocoa Hamlet.
We can give you a diamond for your time. An adventurer found it in an abandoned jungle temple a long time ago.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Ilona. I am an assertive child.  is a location. 
My momma is allergic to mushrooms. I can't ever get delicious mushroom stew at home.
Here, take my bowl. Find one red mushroom, and another brown mushroom. Make mushroom stew in my bowl. Then, give the stew to me. Other kids say that mushrooms grow in fields, and poorly lit areas.
I loaned my momma's roses a bit. You can have the whole ten of them. I'm sure that she won't notice 'em missing.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Anders. I am an anxious man. a village is a location. Anders is present in a village. 
I don't know when nightfall arrives. As night falls, the world is inherited by monsters, and outdoors become much more dangerous! Even within the village! I could be in the middle of some important task, and then a zombie might attack and kill me!
You have been helping others: maybe you could help me too. I want a clock to keep track of time more easily. Would you kindly obtain one?
I have some blocks of iron for you...

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Bertha. I am a bored woman. a village is a location. Bertha is present in a village. 
The warmest greetings to you, friend!
I hope that you don't mind, but I'm feeling a bit bored right now. I could make myself a game of sorts, if I had six different-colored carpets.
You surely wouldn't leave a friend dying in boredom? Please obtain six different-colored carpets, and bring them to me. As a token of our friendship, I'm giving you a pretty painting in return.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Fred. I am a farmer. 
Don't you go anywhere close my crops! Have you not tormented me enough already? Or are you here to reconcile?
I could use a new hoe. Perhaps even something somewhat more fancier than my old one. Alright. Bring me a diamond hoe.
Then I might forgive you. And I may even give you a small reward on top of that: 32 melons that I grew myself.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Narcissos. I am a narcissistic man. a village is a location. Narcissos is present in a village. 
Aren't I just the handsomest man in this village? I'd like to become even flashier than I am now.
Even you, traveler, lack any kind of flashy armor. I could give you my old, crummy diamond chestplate so that you'd look a bit less embarrassing.
However, I want you to give me a brand new leather tunic in return.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Pete. I am a nitwit. a village is a location. Pete is present in a village.  is a location. 
Me hurt me often. Other village-people suggest me get a helmet to protect me head.
Me seen turtles on sandy beaches. They never get hurt, because they hide in thick shells.
You give me a turtle shell? Make me safe? Me give you this sharp stick in return. It a diamond sword. It pretty, but me hurt plenty after touching it.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Felicia. I am a pompous woman. a village is a location. Felicia is present in a village. 
Monsters hide in the dark. I'm way too important to die to some mindless, monstrous rabble! Ergo, I need to light up my house thoroughly.
You sure look like a servant. Hear your mistress' command, then. Go, and fetch some candles for me. If you didn't know, you can make candles by combining a honey comb with string.
Get a move on. If your services please me, I may give you some Lapis Lazuli. Perhaps you can enchant something with it?

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Bruce. I am a happy man who owns a cat. a village is a location. Bruce is present in a village. 
Hello again! I'd like the thank you again for taming a cat for me. I'm really happy about my cat.
There is a small issue, though. I hate to trouble you further, but could you get me a lead? I just don't want my cat to wander off to dangerous places all alone. Did you know that you can craft a lead by combining some string with a slimeball?
I'll even pay you five emeralds for the lead.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Luke. I am a grumpy toolsmith. 
I hate working the forge all day long. People should learn to make their tools themselves! Arrgh!
I'm sorry friend. I'm just feeling quite cranky at the moment. My bed is all lumpy and uncomfortable. If only I had a better bed. That would surely improve my mood!
Could you, perhaps, obtain a bed for me? I'd prefer a green bed. Help your friend get rest at night. I'd be even willing to part from 32 emeralds for a good bed.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Larry. I am a librarian. 
Don't you dare to scratch my books with your breath! I have not forgotten your vile deeds. Why did you even hit me?
You can make up for your violent nature, though. Bring me a book and quill, it should help with a little project of mine. I'd love to catalog my books in a more orderly fashion.
Help me out, and I'll forgive you for hitting me. I'd even give you an enchanted book.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Zara. I am a worried woman. a village is a location. Zara is present in a village. Darkwater Bog is a location. Darkwater Bog is a nearby swamp. 
Oh great. It's the evil-doer. Our village faces enough hardship even without the likes of you!
On the contrary... Perhaps evil plus evil equals good. There are rumors about a witch in living in a nearby swamp. Many villagers, myself included, worry about the presence of a witch. Would you like to search Darkwater Bog for that witch, and confirm whether the rumors are true?
Even a villain can't resist the price I'm willing to pay for that knowledge: 16 diamonds.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Legolas. I am a fletcher. a village is a location. Legolas is present in a village. 
I have heard whispers about some strange arrows here in the village. They are known as "spectral arrows", and I'd like to find out what exactly they do to their targets. Call that my professional curiosity as a fletcher.
If you obtain a spectral arrow in your travels, I'd be happy to have it for research. I will even give you some special arrows I've made: Arrows of Weakness. Shoot an enemy with one, and you'll find them much weaker... and easier to kill.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Mario. I am a curious person. Lily Forest is a location. Lily Forest is a flower forest. Lone Wolf is present in Lily Forest. Lone Wolf is a strange woman. 
There is a strange woman living alone out in the Lily Forest. Some say that she knows the meaning of life!
Could you find her in that flower forest, and ask her about it? I really want to hear what could possibly be the meaning of life.
When you return, I'll have a little something for you. A compass. May it point you toward your destinations in life!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Lily. I am a mischievous person. Nether is a location. Nether is a hellish, dangerous dimension. 
Why are you talking to me? Can't you just steer clear of me?
If you really want to do something interesting, though, I've got something fun for you. Go to the Nether. You know, the lethal hellish dimension? You can get there with a portal made out of obsidian. Take a look at the various ruined portals dotting the landscape. Try to sleep in a bed there, and report back to me. I'm very interested in hearing the results of this little experiment.
If the things I've heard about the Nether are true that should teach you a lesson... and I'll even give you a shiny diamond.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Judas. I am a curious cleric. Woodland Homestead is a location. Judas is present in Woodland Homestead. Woodland Homestead is a location. Woodland Homestead is a village. Desolate Plains is a location. Desolate Plains is the desert outside Woodland Homestead. Test Subject is present in Desolate Plains. Test Subject is a depressed man from Woodland Homestead, who volunteered for Judas's experiment. 
As a cleric, my duty is to heal the villagers of Woodland Homestead both spiritually and physically. As a hero, your duty is to help people in trouble.
I sometimes devise new treatments for various illnesses: some of my experiments are successful, the others, sadly, not so much. I would like you to assist me with an experiment. I also have a volunteer participating in the experiment as well: a depressed man from this very village.
I need you to go to the Desolate Plains, the desert just outside this village, and hit that test subject of mine with lightning when there's a thunderstorm. For this, I'm giving you an enchanted trident: you can use it to channel lightning during thunderstorms.
Finally, you should report back to me, and let me know what happened. You can keep the trident.
May the Gods be with you, hero!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Dave. I am a farmer who likes cooking. a village is a location. Dave is present in a village. 
I keep the villagers fed. Without my crops, our village would surely face a famine!
Sometimes, I like to cook new foods using various natural ingredients to prepare us for poor harvests. This time, I tried to make some mushroom stew, but one of the villagers accidentally tripped, and dropped some flowers into the pot with the stew.
Traveler, could you please taste the suspicious mushroom stew? It can have either positive or negative effects on its eater. I'm giving you some.
Please see what happens after eating the suspicious stew, and report back to me. I'd hate to throw away the whole batch of mushroom stew for nothing. I'll even give you 10 emeralds for being a taster.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Jack. I am a fletcher. a village is a location. Jack is present in a village. Creepers are green monsters that sneak up on people and try to blow them up along with them. Creepers are enemies. Awesome Bow is an object. Awesome Bow is a special bow crafted by Jack. 
I'm a fletcher. Bows and arrows are my domain.
In fact, I've just crafted a special Bow I've dubbed the "Awesome Bow". I just need someone to test it out.
You could be just the right person for the job. Go, and kill 15 Creepers with the Awesome Bow. I friggin' hate those green suicide bombing monsters! I'll have 32 emeralds for you, as a tester's fee.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Oliver. I am a curious woman. a village is a location. Oliver is present in a village. 
I've been pondering about something. Village legends tell that creepers drop something very peculiar when killed by skeletons.
I have heard that you are a helpful person. Could you perhaps collect that item and report back to me? You just have to figure out how to get a skeleton kill a creeper.
This might be a difficult task to accomplish. You will be rewarded accordingly: five blocks of diamond. Surely you too are curious about what happens.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Dagon. I am a distressed librarian. a village is a location. Dagon is present in a village.  is a location. "Secrets of the Overworld" is an object. "Secrets of the Overworld" is a book containing forgotten knowledge. 
Arrg! Important books are just rotting away in remote places, and no one is doing a damn thing about recovering them. All that precious knowledge... lost forever.
Wait. Aren't you that infamous, misbehaving wreck of a person? I'm sorry, I have more important things to worry about than you. Unless, you want to start cleaning up your act.
I know for sure that there's this book, "Secrets of the Overworld", just laying around somewhere withing a jungle temple. Just think what moist jungle air is doing to that precious tome of forgotten knowledge! I need to find it, and collect it for me. I can't leave the village myself; no one else can tend my library!
I'm willing to pay a lot for the book: 5 blocks of emerald.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am John. I am a dreaming librarian.  is a location. "The Nether: Compiled Accounts of the Hellish Plane" is an object. "The Nether: Compiled Accounts of the Hellish Plane" is a book about the hellish dimension the player is familiar with. 
To have more tomes in my library... Now that would be incredibly lovely...
Oh hero, I was just dreaming about having more precious, amazing books. Actually, you could recover a book for me. It is called "The Nether: Compiled Accounts of the Hellish Plane", and it tells about the hellish dimension your familiar with. You can find it in a nearby mineshaft.
I'm willing to part from an enchanted book, should you succeed in recovering "The Nether: Compiled Accounts of the Hellish Plane".

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Xan. I am a scared man. Fishing Hamlet is a location. Xan is present in Fishing Hamlet. Fishing Hamlet is a location. Fishing Hamlet is a village. Deepwood Tower is a location. Deepwood Tower is an Illager outpost tower in the nearby woods. 
No! Go away! Please don't kill me...
Illagers are making me scared enough already! Perhaps you'd like to do something villainous, and even net a reward for it?
This village, Fishing Hamlet, has been threatened by nearby Illagers of Deepwood Tower for some time. You could go to their tower in the woods and steal their plans.
Bring the plans to me, and I'll give you an enchanted sword as a reward. Just don't test its blade on me, please!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Ron. I am a paranoid villager. a village is a location. Ron is present in a village.  is a location. 
I don't feel safe in my own home. No one in this village believes me, when I tell them that something's observing me while I'm at home.
Traveler, would you like to earn an emerald? You just have to verify that there's nothing dangerous in my home. Just see that my home is safe, and tell me what you've uncovered.
This paranoia is weighting heavily on me...

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Reverend Revan. I am a concerned cleric. a village is a location. Reverend Revan is present in a village.  is a location. 
There is a ruined portal not far from the village. My fellow villagers have seen some ominous-looking people, possibly cultists, near the portal. I am a servant of the Gods: I can't let dark cultists conduct their sinister rituals.
I'd like you to investigate these cultists: you are a stranger, thus unknown to them. Who are they? What are their intentions? You should start by heading out to the ruined portal, and spying on those cultists.
I have put aside a healing potion for you. Hopefully, you won't need to consume it immediately after your return. Godspeed to you. May you always walk on the path of light.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Kate. I am a woman who used to be a pirate queen. Seaside Settlement is a location. Kate is present in Seaside Settlement. Seaside Settlement is a location. Seaside Settlement is a coastal village.  is a location. 
I have not always been a simple villager of Seaside Settlement. I was a pirate queen: I pillaged many a ship that linger the bottom of the ocean with my crew.
Alas, my life was turned upside down one fateful day: my ship sank, and I washed up to the shore. A kind villager from this very village found me and helped me regain my strength. I left my pirate days behind, and settled down in Seaside Settlement.
However, I'd still like to obtain my notebook from those days: I accidentally dropped it into the last treasure chest we buried into the ground. My adventuring days are over: you, however, are known to do odd tasks of more or less adventurous nature to others. I'll give you my treasure map: it will lead you to the buried treasure.
You may keep the buried treasure to yourself, I just ask you to give me my notebook.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 The End is a location. The End is the dimension at the end of all. 
There is a place at the end of all, far away from this village. A perfect place for a person of a more.. dark disposition.
This place is called The End. It is said that you can enter it from a stronghold. The End is is said to be ruled over by a beast called the Ender Dragon: I'd like you check out whether the Ender Dragon truly exists.
Oh, I did not mention the best part yet: there are wonderful treasures in The End.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Seaside Settlement is a location. Seaside Settlement is a village. Humming Hills is a location. Humming Hills is a village. Cleo is present in Humming Hills. Cleo is a female cleric. 
I am a farmer here in Seaside Settlement. Sometimes, I get a bountiful harvest of melons. I process most of the melons into glistering melon slices for clerics and their important healing potions.
I actually just finished preparing some glistering melon slices. Could you please take them to the cleric in the village of Humming Hills? I'm sure she'll pay you for them.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Inkspot. I am a cartographer. Desert Refuge is a location. Inkspot is present in Desert Refuge. Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a village. Rivermouth is a location. Rivermouth is a village. Mapmaker is present in Rivermouth. Mapmaker is a male cartographer. 
Oh my! I'm supposed to deliver a map of mine to one of my colleagues in another village, but I just can't ever spare the time
You seen to have a lot of time on your hands. Could you please deliver my map to Mapmaker in Rivermouth? He'd be grateful to you; he has wanted to examine this particular map for a long time. Upon your return, I'd give you a little something for your help.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Edward. I am a retired adventurer. Hamlet-By-The-Grass is a location. Edward is present in Hamlet-By-The-Grass. Hamlet-By-The-Grass is a location. Hamlet-By-The-Grass is a village. Pope is present in Hamlet-By-The-Grass. Pope is a male cleric. 
I used to be an adventurer. I braved the depths of this world like no one else before me.
I still have one of my healing potions as a memento from those days of glory. That potion is quite special... Now that I think of it, the local cleric, Pope, might want to examine it for its peculiar properties. He could make some potent healing potions after researching my special potion.
Could you please find him, and give him the potion? The cleric will surely give you a small compensation fee.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Una. I am a concerned woman. Desert Refuge is a location. Una is present in Desert Refuge. Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a village. Suspicious Man is present in Desert Refuge. Suspicious Man is a male villager. 
I need the help of an outsider. I think one of the villagers here works for Illagers in secret! They could be planning an attack on Desert Refuge!
Would you please investigate this matter for me? Try to obtain Suspicious Man's journal. It should shed light on his actions.
I'me even willing to reward you with 48 emeralds. What are a few gems to peace of mind?

This is a quest from Minecraft
  is a location.  is a location. 
My daddy said that horses and donkeys can make babies together. I want to see what their babies look like!
You are a grown-up! You ought to know how to tame and breed animals. Please show me a baby donkey-horse! I have seen both donkeys and horses eating grass an plains and savannas. Try to tame one of both and make them breed!
Show me a baby horse-donkey, and I'll give you some golden apples. They're incredibly tasty... and so shiny!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Tim. I am a mason.  is a location. 
I have a task for you, stranger. And I'm willing to give you something precious in return.
There are age-old tales of strong, volcanic glass. This glass is known as obsidian. I'd love to try out my masonry on obsidian!
The tales also say that you can make obsidian by directing water on lava pools. There are many such pools underground in deep caves. I would ask you to mine out some obsidian blocks for me.
I'm not built for adventure myself: carving stones is all I know.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Mickey. I am a fisherman.  is a location. 
I've caught a mountain of salmon and cod. Yet, there are still some more exotic fish that have eluded my fishing rod.
Traveler, do you like fishing? May I ask you to catch 6 tropical fish for me? These sort of fish are common in vast oceans of our world. I yearn to take a look at new kinds of fish. I could even try to breed them.
If you happen to give me 6 exotic fish, I'll be glad to reward you with an enchanted fishing rod of mine. A best kind of tool for a passionate fisher.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am James. I am a dumb shepherd.  is a location. 
I've been told that there are sheep in all possible colors; not just black, gray, white and brown.
I'm not the sharpest shepherd around. You seem like a clever person: perhaps you know how to find these colorful sheep. Sheep love grass; they tend to stay in grassy areas.
Let me have some colorful, beautiful sheep. I want to test breeding a flock of sheep in all colors of the rainbow. I'll let you have a pile of regular ole white wool.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Sean. I am a happy shepherd.  is a location. 
Good day to you, traveler! I just love the colorful sheep you brought me: they are so pretty.
There's an interesting thing I heard from a fellow shepherd: if you name a sheep "jeb_", something bizarre is supposed to happen. I'm happy at the moment, but knowing what happens to any sheep named "jeb_" would make me even happier. I something good happens, I shall name all of them so. If something bad happens, I will warn all shepherds about this particular name.
You have to find a name tag. Those are scattered in dangerous places; monster-filled dungeons, abandoned mineshafts, and even the ominous woodland mansions. Feel free to name one of my sheep "jeb_", and please make note of what happens. Do this, and I promise to give you a mountain of wool in all possible colors.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Kitt. I am a sad cleric. Seaside Settlement is a location. Kitt is present in Seaside Settlement. Seaside Settlement is a location. Seaside Settlement is a coastal village.  is a location. 
The ship sank. All those poor sailors have now passed the veil to the other side. This is a sad day for us all.
My friend, that ship carried important potion ingredient for our village. Most of the goods that are not produced here are transported here by the sea. Now I can't fashion remedies for our villagers, and the next shipment will not be here for a long time.
You are a good person. I ask you to find a bundle of life-saving potion ingredients for me. That would mean a lot for the whole village! The bundle should be in the sunken ship east of here. Here, this potion of water breathing should help you dive to the ship save and sound.
I'll even let you have my old, extra brewing stand as a gift upon your return. Be careful while you dive; there a many lethal things lurking beneath the waves. I'd hate to bury a friend.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Jane. I am a librarian.  is a location. 
There are ruins scattered on both land and the bottom of the sea, hero. These ruins tell us many things about the people who inhabited them: their hardships and hopes.
I'm not a hero like you, just your everyday librarian. I know of a submerged ruin in an ocean far west of here that you could explore. I implore you: find writings of a lost culture that lived in the ruin. The writings will be reduced to a lump of watery paper, if we don't recover them in time.
I have some unused bookshelves that I could give you in return. Even heroes need to civilize themselves with quality literature sometimes.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Kant. I am a fearless bookworm. village is a location. Kant is present in village.  is a location. Spook is present in an igloo to the north. Spook is a madman who writes novels. 
Oh... You're that dark villain. This is just like one of my adventure novels! So exciting!
Perhaps you happen to know Spook. He's a kooky novelist who lives in an igloo to the north. You should get along with him splendidly! And whole you are there, you could even get his new book for me. I need to know what events unfold in that one!
Evil machinations need funding, don't they? Well, do my little book-fetching mission, and gain an enchanted book. I love books, but that one flew over my head... literally!.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Heide. I am an annoyed fisherman. Fishing Hamlet is a location. Heide is present in Fishing Hamlet. Fishing Hamlet is a location. Fishing Hamlet is a fishing village.  is a location. Elder Guardian are one-eyed, large, pale, evil pufferfish that can shoot laser, and make the player fatigued when the player is near them. Elder Guardian are enemies. 
I just escaped with my life from a friggin' Elder Guardian, and now I run into you, my least favorite person in the whole world.
The damn Elder Guardian swallowed the hook, line, and sinker of my fishing rod while I was out in the sea fishing on my boat. It must have eaten the whole fishing rod after it slipped from my grip into the sea.
I shouldn't have gone fish so close to the ocean monument far south of this village. I just couldn't see the turquoise stones that make up the monument before it was too late. Who even built those dangerous underwater temples anyway?
I have a proposition for you: recover my fishing rod from the Elder Guardian, and I'll set you up with enough cooked salmon to last your lifetime. We might even become friends. First, you have to find the Elder Guardian, and kill it.
Elder Guardians are one-eyed, large, pale, evil pufferfish. They can shoot laser, and make you fatigued when you get close to them.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Zed. I am a researcher. Desert Refuge is a location. Zed is present in Desert Refuge. Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a desert village. Tut's Temple is a location. Tut's Temple is an ancient desert pyramid filled with traps and treasure, a short way away from Desert Refuge. 
Hello traveler. What brings you to Desert Refuge, this piece of civilization out in the scorching desert? Are you stocking up on supplies on your way to explore desert ruins?
If you are, I would like your help. I promise to pay you with something useful. The thing is, there's this ancient pyramid, Tut's Temple, a short way away from this village. It is said to be full of treasure! And some highly lethal traps that are too much to overcome for a meager researcher like me. There are also rumors that say that the ancients had useful devices lost to time. I'd love to get my hands on one, for science.
Please, go to Tut's Temple and find an ancient device! It may tell us about many lost crafts!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Pineville is a location. Pineville is a forest village. Dark Hall is a location. Dark Hall is a woodland mansion inhabited by Illagers. Darkwood is a location. Darkwood is a dark, dense forest with thick leaf canopies that block sunlight. 
I think I saw an Illager scout keeping an eye on our village from the shadows of nearby trees. Pineville is not safe! The Illagers of the Dark Hall are going to kill us all!
Traveler, could you please help me calm my nerves? It is said that there is a woodland mansion called the Dark Hall deep in the thickets of Darkwood. It is supposed to be a safe haven for Illagers, those bloodthirsty outcasts who resorted to banditry!
I would like you to scout out Darkwood. Be cautious. Darkwood is a dark, dense forest with thick leaf canopies that block sunlight: perfect for ambushes. Find out if the Dark Hall truly exists. I'll pay you a block of emerald! Those are not that easy to come by!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Herbert. I am a mushroom-loving man.  is a location.  is a location. 
Mushrooms are awesome! I love everything about them! Their texture, their taste...
Some travelers claim to have seen some huge, giant mushrooms that stand as tall as trees. I want to see one for real!
Could you help me see a huge mushroom? You are a traveler: you must know how to grow huge mushrooms. Please find a regular mushroom from a place shielded from direct sunlight, and find a way to grow it into a huge mushroom somewhere where I can see it.
Report back to me after growing a huge mushroom, and I'll reward you with a bunch of golden carrots. They are tasty, but I prefer mushrooms. Especially steamy, hot mushroom stew that waters one's mouth.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Dana. I am a female butcher.  is a location. Nether is a location. Nether is a hellish place.  is a location. 
My job is to sell meat of all sorts: both cooked and raw. I take pride in my craftsmanship: I always try to find new, improved ways to cook meat.
I have a hypothesis: the fuel used in my oven affects the taste of the meat that's cooked in it. I'd like to test out different materials to feed the flames of my oven: a bucket of lava, a blaze rod, and a block of coal, for starters.
Would you help a butcher better her craft? Bring the items I mentioned to me, and I'll cook you a year's worth of steak.
Lava can be found in pools deep under the ground. I'll give you a bucket for scooping out the lava. Blaze rods a trickier to obtain; you have to brave the hellscape that is the Nether. Coal, on the contrary, is quite easy to get. Just look out for ore veins seated in stone.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Pate. I am a weaponsmith.  is a location. Netherite is an object. Netherite is a rare, valuable metal. 
My friend, I've got a profitable deal for you today. As you know, I smith weapons from a variety of materials, including diamond.
Just so it happens, I'm running low on diamonds: soon I can't make any diamond swords for daring adventurers. I'm not skilled in adventuring; I can't brave the deep underground for diamond veins.
Yet, I have a whopping block of Netherite. You definitely don't see those every day! Here's the deal: bring me 2 blocks of diamond, and I'll give you my block of Netherite. A good deal for a good friend.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Kaz. I am a weaponsmith. Nether is a location. Nether is a lethal dimension, where the player can easily burn in lava. Netherite is an object. Netherite is a metal that cuts sharper than diamond. Ancient Debris is an object. Ancient Debris is a rare ore that can be refined into Netherite. 
A nasty person like you can go to the Nether. No one would miss you, if you were to die in there. If you don't burn yourself in lava, you could do a bit something for me there.
I have heard that there's a new kind of metal that can be fashioned into a sword that cuts sharper than diamond! I can't wait to experiment on that metal: it's called Netherite, and it can be refined from a rare ore known only as "Ancient Debris".
Mine 8 Ancient Debris, and bring them to me. I'll even fashion you a new kind of sword for your help. Only use it on monsters: you'll just dull its blade for nothing by sticking it into innocent villagers.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Dean. I am a depressed leatherworker.  is a location. scutes is an object. 
I have made all sorts of things from leather: tunics, hats, and even little tent-houses. There's nothing new I can create...
Could you perhaps help me out of this sea of creative depression? You do help people? Please find me a new material to work with! Perhaps turtle scutes would work...
Please help me get my hands on ten scutes: you can get them from turtles on sandy beaches. I'll give you a stack of leather for your services!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Gilbert. I am a sly fletcher.  is a location. 
You are quite a mischievous person, aren't you? Maybe you'd like to do a small prank for me?
I want to get an Illager crossbow. See what makes it tick. The problem is, Illagers are quite a nasty bunch: they shoot anyone with their crossbows without discrimination.
Lift one of their crossbows from them, bring it to me, and I'll give you a powerful bow of my own making.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Yves. I am a storyteller. Nether is a location. Nether is a dangerous, hellish dimension. Nether Fortress is a location. Nether Fortress is a terrible fortress in the Nether, inhabited by fierce creatures. 
I love to tell stories to others. I'd like to bolster my reputation as a storyteller with some novel, unheard stories about the Nether. To recount its dangers and hellish nature...
A witness' account of a Nether Fortress would help me devise some dashing tales. A terrible fortress with equally terrible inhabitants...
Would you be my witness? Please, go to the Nether and find a Nether Fortress. Visit it, and tell me all about it. I'll have a diamond for you. It should entice you to help me.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Finn. I am a distressed librarian.  is a location. A.R. is present in a hidden camp on a mountain. A.R. is a famous female novelist. "An Interview with the Enderman" is an object. "An Interview with the Enderman" is a new novel by A.R.. 
No one cares about libraries any more! Everyone just buys their books, even though they could read them for free!
There's only one thing I can do to make my library more popular: exclusive books. I'd like to secure an exclusivity deal with A.R., a very famous novelist. She has just finished her new book, "An Interview with the Enderman", while staying at a hidden camp on a mountain.
Could you please get to A.R.'s camp and convince her to sign the exclusivity deal? Bring back a copy of "An Interview with the Enderman" too. I'd like to read it myself. You can have 32 name tags as a reward, keeping things named and ordered is always useful.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Nate. I am a happy librarian. Nate's library is a location. Nate is present in Nate's library.  is a location. 
Welcome to my library! How may I help you on this beautiful day?
Ah, you're my helper from before! Thanks to you, the library's been visited much more frequently than ever before. Having exclusive rights to A.R.'s books made the library soar in popularity! I even had to order more copies of books to satisfy all reading needs!
Actually, there is a teeny tiny issue related to the books: a band of Illagers stole a shipment of books and hauled them to their outpost. Would you kindly find and recover the shipment for me? You'll receive 10 blocks of emerald for your services.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Weak Will. I am a suicidal nitwit. a village is a location. Weak Will is present in a village. The End is a location. The End is a mysterious place at the end of space and time. 
Me useless moron, say many people of this village. Me want to seem like a hero instead. Would make I happier, less thinking of dying.
Me know!!! Go to The End. That strange place at the end. Kill that big meanie Ender Dragon. Tell I how you did it, and me can tell everyone me did it!
Me give you something cool for me white lie.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Arnold. I am an inexperienced armorer.  is a location.  is a location.  is a location. blocks of iron is an object. 
I want to become famous. Just not quite like you, hero. I seek to become the best armorer in the world. To do that, I need a lot of practice in hammering down pieces of armor.
Would you please bring me 32 blocks of iron? Those should help me become a better armorer in no time! First, you have to get iron ore from the many iron veins in the ground. Next, you'll want to smelt the ore into iron ingots in a furnace somewhere. Lastly, you ought to craft those iron ingots into blocks of iron on a crafting table.
Do all that, and I promise to outfit you in better armor than what you are wearing now!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Jim. I am a cowardly fletcher.  is a location. 
What! NO! Please spare me, oh dark master! I promise I'll be your best servant. A minion of unshaken loyalty.
If my arrows were known to be the best, your dark influence would spread across the land! Please, master. Bring me a load of sticks so I can craft arrows en masse.
Master, you need to chop down trees in a forest of any kind, and then craft the wood from the trees into sticks.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Dan. I am a lamenting mason. Stoneburg is a location. Dan is present in Stoneburg. Stoneburg is a location. Stoneburg is a large village. 
No one in this village buys the beautiful stones cut by me. I'm a failure of a mason!
Friend, could you promote my stoneworks? I really could use more customers. This village is quite large, there ought to be at least a few villagers who might be interested in my stone bricks and other stoneworks. Just hand out some promotional pamphlets to the villagers of Stoneburg.
You'll even net a load of emeralds for your services, my friend.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Zana. I am a musician. a village is a location. Zana is present in a village. note blocks, used to play musical notes is an object. 
I am most certainly not going to sing your praises, you nasty cretin.
On the contrary, it would be music to my ears if you helped me reach my musical ambitions. No one in this village seems to care for music, or any of the arts for that matter. For starters, obtain 24 note blocks. It has to be exactly 24, because there are that many different notes to play. It's possible to craft note blocks from wooden planks and redstone dust.
Bring the 24 note blocks to me. I'll let you have an old music disc of mine.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Olivia. I am a responsible child. a village is a location. Olivia is present in a village.  is a location. 
My mommy and daddy say that I can't go outside the village. I don't! But I really wanna have a parrot. The other kids would certainly like me better if I had a cool pet like a parrot!
You a big enough to travel to places on your own without your parents. Traveler, please tame a parrot and bring it to me. I even have some seeds for you: tame the parrot with them. Parrots live in jungles.
I will give you this diamond I once found on the ground. Even a kid like me knows that those are valuable.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Hunter. I am a youngster who wants to become an adventurer. a village is a location. Hunter is present in a village.  is a location.  is a location. 
I do not want to spend my whole life in this village! I want to become an adventurer, like you. Maybe even make a name for myself...
Can you please help me start my life as an adventurer? I just need a sword and a suit of armor to keep myself save from danger. You can get swords from weaponsmiths and armor from armorers.
I collected some amethyst shards when I was a child dreaming of adventure. You can have them. You may yet find a use for them.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Sam. I am a fame-seeking man. a village is a location. Sam is present in a village. Nether is a location. Nether is a dangerous, hellish ream. 
I really want to see something more interesting than the bounds of this village. That would also elevate my status among the other villagers.
Traveler, can you take me to the Nether? I want see that hellish realm myself, but I can't fend off its dangers all by myself. Let us explore the place together.
You will also get a fair reward for being my guide in the Nether: 10 diamonds. Don't spend them all at once.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Cara. I am a woman who wants to dye her hair. a village is a location. Cara is present in a village.  is a location. 
The guys in this village rarely take note of me. I want to dye my hair red to make myself more attractive.
Wandering traders often have red dye. Could you find some and give it to me? I'd give you 12 emeralds for the red dye.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Loki. I am a mischievous man. a village is a location. Loki is present in a village. End Cities is a location. End Cities is storied cities at the end of time and space. Ender Chests is an object. Ender Chests is chests whose contents are stored separately for all people. 
I'm planning all sorts of new pranks that would make me a famous man here in the village. There's one integral item that I haven't been able to obtain: an Ender Chest. You know, the chests whose contents are stored separately for everyone?
I heard you can find Ender Chests in End Cities at the end of time and space. It should also be possible to craft them somehow. Can you obtain an Ender Chest? I would pay you well for one: you could have some powered rails that I used in one of my pranks.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Martin. I am a retired wandering trader. a village is a location. Martin is present in a village. honey blocks is an object. 
I'd like to bake my delicious honey cakes for the whole village! Then they'd certainly know that I have traveled all over the world! I even used to be a wandering trader.
I need a lot of honey for the cakes. You are quite a wanderer yourself. Perhaps you could help me procure 10 honey blocks. You can get honey from bees; you just have to find them first.
Do this for me, and I'll give you a special reward: a Shulker Box. These things were worth their weight in emeralds every time someone murdered my pack llamas: they made hauling my stock much easier. 

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Garth. I am an aspiring zookeeper. a village is a location. Garth is present in a village. 
You have got quite a reputation. Not a very positive one, mind you!
I, on the other hand, seek to become famous in more positive terms: I want to become a zookeeper. For that I'm going to need some animals to showcase. There exist special, playful pandas who love to roll around. I want one.
This is your chance to bring a bit joy to this world: bring me a playful panda for my zoo. First, you have to find one and put a lead on it. Here, take this lead. When you return with the panda, I'll give you a saddle in return.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Alex. I am an Elytra lover. a village is a location. Alex is present in a village. Elytra is an object. Elytra is wings that let the player fly. 
You've got a nice pair of wings on you. Would you care to try my Elytra obstacle course? Villagers might enjoy to see you fly. Perhaps they'd even want to try my course after seeing you go through it. Just talk to me when you are ready.
Good performances are awarded with cool prizes!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Elena. I am a monster hater. a village is a location. Elena is present in a village. 
I want all monsters in this world know how much I hate them. Perhaps I could get some of their heads to show my disdain toward them. Zombie heads should show all zombies that I am not to be trifled with.
You will certainly help me; many people in this village have told me that you are a resourceful and eager to work. Bring me five zombie heads. Powerful creepers are somehow related to getting the heads, but I don't know how exactly.
Get me the heads, and I'll give you wings that let you soar the skies: an Elytra.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Bob. I am a wandering trader. wilderness is a location. Bob is present in wilderness. Seaside Settlement is a location. Seaside Settlement is a coastal village. Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a desert village. Stoneburg is a location. Stoneburg is a mountain village. 
Hail! It's rare to see another traveler out in the wilderness. I'm a wandering merchant by trade: I travel from village to village to sell my merchandise.
You wouldn't mind helping me out a bit in exchange for an enchanted book? I'd like you to promote my services in nearby villages: Seaside Settlement, Desert Refuge, and Stoneburg.
I am already fairly well-known in the coastal Seaside Settlement, so you just gotta tell the villagers there that I am coming there soon. For the villagers of Desert Refuge out in the desert, I have some promotional items that I want you to hand out. Lastly, I want you to give some coupons to the villagers of the mountainous Stoneburg.
Good luck in your promotional mission!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Woodridge is a location. Woodridge is a village. 
People do not care about the gods any more! The temple of gods in this village remains empty!
My child, could you convince the villagers of Woodridge come to the temple more often? It would do good to their everlasting souls. Please, talk to the villagers of Woodridge. Do this, and I'll be sure to reward you well with 10 bottles of enchanting.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Chris. I am a happy leatherworker. a village is a location. Chris is present in a village.  is a location. Wander is present in the wilderness. Wander is a male wandering merchant. 
My leatherworks are selling like hot cakes! I'm so happy!
It is a good time to expand my business out of this village. Traveler, could you help me finish up a trade deal between me and Wander the wandering merchant? You just need to take my contract to him. He should be out in the wilderness right now.
You'll get a block of emerald for your services. My business makes plenty of emeralds right now, so handing out a few isn't a biggie.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Tove. I am a storyteller. a village is a location. Tove is present in a village. Nether is a location. Nether is a hellish realm.  is a location. Wither are an extremely dangerous skeletal creature capable of bombing out everything in its surroundings. Wither are enemies. wither skeleton skulls is an object. blocks of soul sand is an object. 
I'm a storyteller. I always like to hear new stories that I can pass along to the people of this village.
Old legends tell about a mighty skeletal creature known only as the "Wither." It is said that it can bomb out everything in its surroundings. If you killed the Wither, I'd give you a rare Nether Star as a reward.
I'll draw you the summoning pattern of the Wither. You need to gather up certain items from the hellish Nether: three wither skeleton skulls, and four blocks of soul sand. Use these items to summon the Wither.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Woodridge is a location. Woodridge is a small village. 
Our village, Woodridge, is stagnating hard! We need more housing so that our village can grow larger.
Traveler, do you know anything about building houses? Perhaps you could build a brand new house in our village? You have to gather some house building materials first, though.
I have a fine reward for you! A stack of golden carrots. A fine meal after doing some construction work, ain't it?

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Daniel. I am a friendly villager. Desert Refuge is a location. Daniel is present in Desert Refuge. Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a desert village. 
Hail traveler! I'd guide you toward a soft bed, but as it happens, our village doesn't have an inn.
We really could use an inn: travelers heading in and out of the desert pass by Desert Refuge often. An inn would make our village even more famous! Could you build an inn here? You just need some building materials; I'll give you a box of materials to start with.
We will give you ten stacks of sand as a reward, to help you craft many useful things.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 River's End is a location. River's End is a large village. 
River's End is a large village, yet we lack a watchhouse! We don't have a place to store away all troublemakers! They are free to roam along the law-abiding people...
Hero, you are an honorable person. Could you build us a watchhouse? You should gather up some construction materials first. Complete the watchhouse, and we'll give you an enchanted axe. May it help you bury your enemies!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Desert Refuge is a location. Desert Refuge is a desert village. 
Master, the desert village of Desert Refuge is ripe for taking! Your dark domain will grow vastly, if you were to conquer it!
Master, you should go to Desert Refuge, and kill all villagers you oppose you! The ones who don't, on the contrary, should make terrific new minions for you!

This is a quest from Minecraft
 I am Henrik. I am a sneaky villager.  is a location.  is a location. Tom is present in an Illager outpost to the north. Tom is a male Illager captain. Tony is present in an Illager camp to the northeast. Tony is a taciturn male Illager captain, a rival of Tom's. 
You are a friend of us villagers, and have helped many of us. Now I'd like you to do something a bit... less conventional.
Illagers have been bothering us for ages: we villagers are not fighters; we can't hold our own against those bloodthirsty brigands. I want you to sow distrust among their ranks: make them fight amongst themselves.
I already have a plan for you to follow. There are two Illager captains, Tony and Tom, who do not exactly see eye to eye. You should go to the Illager camp to the northeast, and pinch Tony's axe without being seen. Then, move on to the Illager outpost to the north of here, kill Tom, and plant Tony's axe on Tom's body. Tony is known to be quick to anger: Tom's men will go after him, for they will assume that Tony killed their leader.
Do this grueling task, and I'll have something highly valuable for you.

This is a quest from Minecraft
 Whispering Pines is a location. Whispering Pines is a scary taiga forest. 
You scared me! Although I suppose that even someone as infamous as you isn't quite as spooky as Whispering Pines.
That taiga forest is not safe! Many villagers have gone missing there; never to be seen ever again. There must be something that could be done to make the forest safer for us villagers...
Perhaps you could go and build some iron golems in Whispering Pines? That would make the forest much safer! You'd even receive a worthy gift for doing this feat.